[]

[image]

The Paradox of the Immune System

Protection, Chronic Inflammation, Autoimmune Disease, Cancer and Pandemics

Louis J. Catania

Salus University, College of Health Sciences, PA, United States

University of North Florida, Osher Lifelong Learning Institute, FL,
United States

[image]

Table of Contents

Cover image

Title page

Copyright

Dedication

List of Figures

List of Tables

Louis J. Catania, O.D., F.A.A.O., D.Sc. (Hon.)

Preface

Acknowledgements

Three reasons to understand the immune system

First…

Second…

Third…

Section 1. Our friendly immune system

Section 1 Our friendly immune system

1. Introduction

1. The innate (aka “natural”) immune system and immunity

1. Some simple definitions of the immune system, immunology, the immune
response, and immunity

2. Development (embryology and beyond) of the immune system [1]

3. The gross and microanatomy of the immune system

4. Innate (aka “natural”) immune response and active immunity [7]

5. Brief research summaries on the innate immune system

Chapter highlights (key points and paradoxical-related information)

2. The adaptive (aka “acquired”) immune system: from friend to foe

1. The path to “dysregulation”

2. Acute inflammation

3. Clinical considerations in acute inflammation

4. Using the adaptive immune response to help and prevent disease

5. The path to chronic inflammation

6. Brief research summaries on the innate and adaptive immune system

Chapter highlights (key point and paradoxical-related information)

3. Genetics and genomics

1. Introduction

2. Basic science of genetics

3. Immunogenetics

4. Immunogenomics

5. Genetics and genomics by the numbers

6. The Human Genome Project [14]

7. Precision (personalized) medicine and prevention [15]

8. XCI (lyonization)

9. The “microbiome”

10. Epigenetics [26]

11. Cytogenetics

12. Big data analytics in genetics and genomics [32]

13. Brief research summaries on genetics and genomics

Chapter highlights on genetics and genomics

Section 2. The enemy within us

Section 2 The enemy within us

1. Introduction

4. Chronic inflammation: “Enemy #1”

1. Introduction

2. Causes (etiologies) of chronic inflammation [2]

3. Advancing adaptive immunity (from acute to chronic inflammation)

4. Differences in chronic inflammation from acute inflammation

5. Some (but not all by a long shot) disease categories associated with
chronic inflammation [7]

6. Clinical diagnosis and treatment of chronic inflammation

7. Neural downregulation of the immune system and chronic inflammation

8. Brief research summaries on chronic inflammation

Chapter highlights (key points and paradoxical-related information)

5. Autoimmune disease: when self becomes the villain

1. Introduction

2. Female predilection for autoimmune disease

3. Theories on the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases [7]

4. Classification of autoimmune diseases

5. General clinical considerations with autoimmune diseases [21]

6. “Top 10” autoimmune diseases (clinical descriptions, diagnosis, and
treatment options) [28,29]

7. General therapeutics considerations with autoimmune diseases

8. Therapeutic (cellular and genetic) procedures

9. Brief research summaries on autoimmune diseases

Chapter highlights (key points and paradoxical-related information)

6. Cancer: immunology's cruelest enemy and greatest challenge

1. Introduction

2. “Cancering”

3. The incidence and prevalence of cancer

4. Description and etiologies of cancers

5. Clinical presentations in cancers [26]

6. Treatment considerations in cancer

7. Brief research summaries on cancers

Chapter highlights (key points and paradoxical-related information)

7. Immunology: The science of pandemics, infectious disease and COVID-19

1. Introduction

2. Background considerations

3. Incidence and prevalence of COVID-19

4. Pathogenesis, immunologic, and immunogenic considerations for
SARS-CoV-2

5. Clinical considerations for coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) infection

6. Immunoinformatics (computational immunology) [68]

7. Epidemiology and public health considerations in COVID-19

8. Brief research summaries on infectious diseases and COVID-19

Chapter highlights (key points)

Epilogue

Glossary

Index

Copyright

Academic Press is an imprint of Elsevier

125 London Wall, London EC2Y 5AS, United Kingdom

525 B Street, Suite 1650, San Diego, CA 92101, United States

50 Hampshire Street, 5th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States

The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford OX5 1GB, United Kingdom

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to
seek permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions
policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright
Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our
website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.

This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected
under copyright by the Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).

Notices

Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As
new research and experience broaden our understanding, changes in
research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may
become necessary.

Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience
and knowledge in evaluating and using any information, methods,
compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information or
methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of
others, including parties for whom they have a professional
responsibility.

To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors,
contributors, or editors, assume any liability for any injury and/or
damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability,
negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods,
products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.

ISBN: 978-0-323-95187-6

For information on all Academic Press publications visit our website at
https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals

[image]

Publisher: Stacy Masucci

Acquisitions Editor: Linda Versteeg-Buschman

Editorial Project Manager: Matthew Mapes

Production Project Manager: Maria Bernard

Cover Designer: Mark Rogers

Typeset by TNQ Technologies

Dedication

For those souls lost during the COVID-19 pandemic and to their families,
my deepest sympathy, and to all those in health care and their families
who have sacrificed so much, my sincere appreciation.

List of Figures

-   Figure 1-1 Organs of the immune system.7
-   Figure 1-2 White blood cells (WBCs or Leukocytes).8
-   Figure 1-3 Antigen presenting complex (Dendritic cell)—diagram #1.12
-   Figure 1-4 Early innate immune response—diagram #2.14
-   Figure 1-5 Continuing innate immune response—diagram #3.17
-   Figure 1-6 The adaptive (acquired) immune response—diagram #4.19
-   Figure 2-1 The inflammatory cascade—diagram #5.28
-   Figure 2-2 Clinical manifestations of acute inflammation—diagram
    #6.32
-   Figure 2-3 Treatment considerations in acute inflammation—diagram
    #7.37
-   Figure 2-4 Leukocyte (neutrophil) extravasation.38
-   Figure 3-1 Chromosome.47
-   Figure 3-2 DNA and RNA structure.48
-   Figure 3-3 Human karyotype.49
-   Figure 3-4 Cellular biology of the human genome.50
-   Figure 3-5 Transcription and translation.52
-   Figure 3-6 Central dogma of molecular biology.53
-   Figure 4-1 Acute versus chronic inflammation.75
-   Figure 4-2 Chronic inflammation and disease.77
-   Figure 5-1 Clinical autoimmune cycle—diagram #8.100
-   Figure 5-2 Stem cell renewal and differentiation.133
-   Figure 5-3 Direct and cell-based stem cell therapy.135
-   Figure 5-4 Chimeric autoantigen receptor T-cells (CAART-T).138
-   Figure 5-5 CRISPR-Cas9 procedure.139
-   Figure 6-1 Monoclonal antibody binding to C19 and C3 receptors.164
-   Figure 6-2 Idiotype-Anti-idiotype Regulatory Circuit (or
    Loop)—Diagram #9.166
-   Figure 6-3 Chimeric antigen receptor T-cells (CART-Ts).167
-   Figure 7-1 SARS-CoV-2 life cycle.189
-   Figure 7-2 mRNA (messenger RNA) vaccine.205

List of Tables

-   Table 4-1 Theories on etiologies and pathogenesis of chronic
    inflammation.73
-   Table 4-2 Proinflammatory mediators.79
-   Table 4-3 Most common chronic inflammatory orthopedic
    (musculoskeletal) conditions (Alphabetical).83
-   Table 4-4 Ten Most Common Chronic Conditions (ranked by death
    rate).85
-   Table 5-1 Listing of prevalent autoimmune diseases.98
-   Table 5-2 Theories on etiologies and pathogenesis of autoimmune
    disease.98
-   Table 5-3 Classification of autoimmune diseases by clinical
    presentation.106
-   Table 5-4 Examples of biologic immunopharmacotherapeutics.112
-   Table 5-5 Ten (10) most common autoimmune diseases.112
-   Table 5-6 Immunotherapeutic medication options for chronic
    inflammation, autoimmune diseases and cancers (Generic and brand
    names/… mab suffix = monoclonal antibody).127
-   Table 5-7 Monoclonal antibody options (generic and brand names).128
-   Table 6-1 Common cancer types.153
-   Table 6-2 Top 10 (10) cancers in America.154
-   Table 6-3 Clinical diagnostic tests for cancer.160

Louis J. Catania, O.D., F.A.A.O., D.Sc. (Hon.)

(Biographical)

Dr. Louis J. (Lou) Catania is an internationally acclaimed educator, and
a recognized expert in eye care, health care, artificial intelligence
(AI), and immunology. He has authored over 160 journal articles and 12
textbooks, one of which, “Primary Care of the Anterior Segment” received
the Baron's Five Star (highest) rating for a medical textbook. He is
currently a lecturer with the University of North Florida, Department of
Continuing Education, Osher Lifelong Learning Institute; and a visiting
Professor at Salus University, College of Health Sciences. During his
52-year clinical and academic career he has taught and lectured
extensively worldwide. Dr. Catania's career in health care started as an
optometric physician with an interest in corneal immunology. That
interest grew into postdoctoral pursuits over the past 35 years with
studies in virology, immunology, and public health (University of
Rochester, UPenn, Stanford Continuing Studies and MIT OpenCourseWare).
He has dedicated himself to research, teaching, and writing with his
three most recent books on AI in health care, AI in immunology, and an
inspired new text on the mercurial nature of the human immune system
(“The Paradox of the Immune System”). Dr. Catania's professional
accomplishments in eye care, health care, and immunology have produced
countless honors and awards including two Honorary Doctor of Science
degrees; Distinguished Faculty Scholar at three academic institutions;
induction into the National Optometry Hall of Fame; and innumerable
domestic and international keynote and commencement addresses. In his
personal time, Dr. Catania is an active volunteer with the National Park
Service; a sea turtle patrol monitor in his beach community; and
involved in multiple environmental, humanitarian and human welfare
agencies.

Preface

Paradox: Something (such as a situation) that is made up of two opposite
things that seems impossible but are actually true or possible

Merriam-Webster's Unabridged Dictionary (2021).

The concepts of “self-versus nonself” and “our best friend and worst
enemy” are of themselves a paradox. Yet these two apparently
contrasting, coupled pairs define the essence of the human immune
system. That being so, understanding this biomedical system of
inconsistencies requires an appreciation of its components and more so,
their relationship to one another. Those intricate and enigmatic
relationships represent the science of immunology. They also embrace the
inherent evolutionary genetics and human biology that produce and
collectively culminate in what this book will attempt to define as “the
paradox of the immune system.”

It is not typical to jump to the Epilogue of a book from its Preface,
but allow me this brief, albeit unorthodox, digression for what I hope
will be a worthwhile departure for you the reader. I start the Epilogue
with the question, “So, just what is ‘the paradox of the immune
system?’” Then I affirm that “the paradox” is actually a collection of
paradoxes, whereupon I proceed to list them (some not all). I am
providing this list for you up front so you can enjoy watching the
“puzzle” unfold, piece-by-piece (or, if you will, “paradox-by-paradox”)
as you read the book. No need to remember them now as I will be
identifying them one-by-one as they surface in the narrative:

1.  • Self-versus nonself;
2.  • Innate versus adaptive immunity;
3.  • Adaptive immunity as a friend and foe;
4.  • Our “best friend and worst enemy”;
5.  • Immunity's regulated and dysregulated systems;
6.  • Health protection and health threat;
7.  • Dangerous versus benign nonself and the toll-like receptor (TLR)
    “sentry”;
8.  • Acute inflammation healing and ulceration;
9.  • Acute versus chronic inflammation;
10. • Accumulation of immune (cellular and humoral) substances in
    tissue;
11. • Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF-α) inflammatory and antiinflammatory
    effects;
12. • Self-versus self (autoimmunity);
13. • Autoimmunity (“the mother of all immune system paradoxes”);
14. • Female versus male predilections to autoimmune diseases and
    certain cancers;
15. • Rogue B-cells attacking self;
16. • Epitope spreading;
17. • The role of the X chromosome and miRNA in males versus females;
18. 
19. • Immunosuppressive agents as therapeutics and as threats;
20. • The immune system and COVID-19 (the infection's best friend and
    worst enemy).

To achieve the ambitious and unique goal of this book, I will
concentrate on a few key objectives. First, I hope to explain in
uncomplicated (make that minimally complicated), understandable
language, the postulate of “self-versus nonself,” our first paradox. The
“self” part is easy, but “nonself” starts getting tricky along the way
as you will see. Second, I must make some sense of, and define the human
immune system in its dual role as our (i.e., humankind's) “best friend
and worst enemy.” As a friend, it protects us 24/7 and helps us defeat
the forces that threaten our wellbeing, until…it becomes the enemy
itself, and endangers our health and even our lives.

To define “the paradox of the immune system,” my plan is to first
describe the innate immune system as “our best friend.” Then our journey
will take us to the darker side of immunology, the adaptive (acquired)
immune system. This cryptic, more ominous side includes chronic
inflammation (“Enemy #1”), autoimmune diseases (“Enemy #2”), cancer
(“the cruelest enemy”), and now, COVID-19. But please understand that
the theme of this book and its emphasis on the “evil” side of our immune
system is not meant as a negative, pessimistic, or fatalistic discussion
of immunology. Quite the contrary. It is an opportunity for us to
understand all the dimensions of our ever-present immune responses and
the power and control they exert on the human body, for better and for
worse. Through such an understanding we are learning how to harness the
immune system's biologic potential, both in vivo (within the body) and
through medical (molecular biology and genetic) manipulations or
“immunotherapies.” This leads us to improvements in the health and
wellness of the human organism and its ability to fight, cure, and even
prevent disease. But notwithstanding the benefits or the potential
benefits of the immune paradox, I will also present the challenges we
have yet to fully understand. Leading those challenges is autoimmunity,
a clinical entity wherein the immune system uses its enormous potential
to turn on itself (us) and create clinical disorders like autoimmune
diseases and cancers which we have yet to fully understand or conquer.

There is one additional goal I will advance and defend in this book. It
is the hypothesis that chronic inflammation, the fundamental
immunopathophysiology of the adaptive immune system is in fact, the
basis for all disease (emphasis on all). I emphasize all because I fully
realize that one must not use the word all in science or healthcare
irresponsibly. In fact, I use it with due respect and regard for its
unqualified meaning of the boundless, intrinsic nature of chronic
inflammation in the human disease process. I will use the information in
the second section of this book, particularly Chapter 4, to defend this
proposition. I would even propose a new name, “pathomelitis,” to better
distinguish chronic inflammation from acute inflammation. That may be
asking for too much, but what the heck. I do believe a better
understanding of chronic inflammation (pathomelitis) would lead to a
better understanding of immunology and more so, of all disease
categories. Just a thought worth contemplating and…prorbably going
nowhere.

As to my hypothesis regarding chronic inflammation (aka pathomelits),
allow me to offer two qualifications that I feel deserve attention, mine
perhaps more than yours. The first regards the use of the words
“disease” and “disorder.” These are two words that will be used
regularly in this book (668 times for “disease” and 74 times for
“disorder”). I want you to understand their distinction, although
somewhat of “a distinction without a difference,” as the saying goes.
But given the frequency of their use, and my hypothesis about chronic
inflammation as the basis of all disease, I feel the distinction
warrants this brief note. A disease is “an abnormal biological process
(a pathology) with a specific cause and identifiable characteristics
(signs and symptoms).” A disorder is “…any deviation from or
interruption of normal structure or function.”[1] I will try to use
these two terms appropriately in our discussion, but forgive me if I err
once or twice.

My second qualifier regarding my chronic inflammation hypothesis
concerns an array of complications (medical, surgical, physiologic,
nosocomial, iatrogenic (bite my tongue!)) associated with diseases.
Unfortunately, those complications are legion and incalculable in health
care. They may include cardio or cerebrovascular sequelae like emboli,
thrombi, stroke; pulmonary, like pleural effusion, pneumothorax;
mechanical, like herniations, obstructions; hematologic like anemias,
hypovolemic shock; and on and on. Any theory on disease etiologies must
be allowed conditional concessions for such unintended, untoward
anomalies. So I hope you'll consider such exemptions as you analyze my
thesis. Please!

As you read this book, from time to time you may feel that certain
portions are discussed at a more basic level than you would think
necessary while other portions may seem more complex. I have attempted
to write this book in an expository (descriptive narrative) style to
accommodate a range of readers from experienced health professionals to
readers with less experience, but no less interested in healthcare
matters, especially in this burgeoning area of immunology. Some of the
technical information and concepts (some rather complex, I admit), I'll
try to present in more straightforward language than technically
oriented textbooks. I'll also try to keep things graphic with numerous
figures and diagrams (“a picture is worth a thousand words”) that will
help explain the abundant levels and processes of the complex immune
system. I will, however, use technical terms, but hopefully never
without having either defined or discussed their meaning prior to their
use. I'll use descriptive parentheticals with many technical terms and
concepts (there are lots of such terms and concepts, so lots of
parentheticals). I am also including a comprehensive glossary of
terminology at the back section of the book for you to reference when
needed. But please know that no discussion at any level is intended to
be patronizing or condescending, as I hope no one will interpret it as
such. It reminds me of one of Albert Einstein's great quotes. Everything
should be made as simple as possible, but not simpler.

I have included a closing section in each chapter with brief research
summaries on the subjects discussed in that chapter. Given the magnitude
of the research literature base in all the areas covered in this book, I
thought it would be worthwhile to share just a few additional, relevant
reviews (67 total). I focus mostly on artificial intelligence (AI)
related research for two reasons. First, given a mixed audience of
medical and health related readers at all levels, I thought that I
should keep the summaries more directed towards applicable clinical
studies rather than the heavy-duty biotechnical laboratory research
being done in immunology. If a given summary really peaks your interest,
I have included reference citations (footnotes) at the end of each so
you can use them to obtain the full literature source. Also, please take
advantage of the list of technical and healthcare-related search engines
I include in my Acknowledgements page for further information on any
given topic. (I included these reference resources under
Acknowledgements because I wanted to express my appreciation for the
enormous value they provided me in my research).

The second reason I focused mostly on AI research is a confession I must
make regarding these research reviews. “In the spirit of full
disclosure” (ain't that a familiar saying these days?), I must tell you
that I have a strong interest and involvement in AI research related to
healthcare. I can assure you that some of the best research in
immunology and healthcare in general, is now being driven by AI, big
data analytics and machine learning algorithms. As such, I do introduce
a fair amount of AI technology applications in the research summaries at
the end of each chapter.

While AI is not rocket science, it can be challenging without some basic
knowledge of its hardware and software. My growing interest in the
science (of AI) and my firm belief in its expanding, disruptive nature
in all fields, especially in health care and immunology (as the research
summaries reflect), led me to write two books over the past 2 years
(plenty of time on our hands during the pandemic). The first book,
“Fundamentals of AI in Healthcare and Bioscience” (from Elsevier, 2020),
introduces AI's increasing role in healthcare. But I do spend the first
3 chapters explaining (trying to, at least) AI basics. If you are not
too comfortable or acquainted with AI, it might be of some value to read
those 3 chapter (available online) to familiarize yourself with the
hardware and software referenced frequently in the research summaries in
this book. Of course, there are other sources for basic AI information,
but I'm familiar with these 3 chapters and believe them to be an easy,
understandable read. The remaining 5 chapters of that first book and the
entire second book, “AI in Immunology” (from Taylor and Francis, 2021)
go “real deep” into AI's association in health care and immunology and,
unless you are a big “fan” of AI, probably deeper than you'd want to go.

Finally, most of my dear friends (and obliging relatives) who were kind
enough to do a prepublication review of the manuscript for this book
provided me with a recurring observation. In spite of a logical, steady
stream of science and facts throughout the narrative, they indicated
that the sheer volume of information was overwhelming. It didn't take
much for me to realize that the “steady stream” of information to which
they were referring was more like “a fire hose.” To wit, I tried
numerous times to edit the text (without being “…simpler” per Albert)
with a more casual, conversational style. I'm sure, however, many
readers will still feel somewhat clobbered by the onslaught of details.
So, I decided to do a brief point-by-point summary at the end of each
chapter highlighting the most relevant facts and concepts in the chapter
with an emphasis (per the book's theme) on the paradoxical nature of the
information. I hope that will help anyone “drinking from the firehose.”

So, after all is said and done, while it's comforting and hopefully
informative to read about and understand our immune system—how it works,
how it protects us and helps us maintain health and wellness—we must
also try to understand the paradox of why and how it attacks us. After
you have read the first section of this book and have become familiar
with the immune system as “our friend,” you will then be able to better
appreciate the effects and issues that chronic inflammation,
autoimmunity, cancer and infectious pandemics represent. I will explain
those considerations and “try” to help you make some sense of the
challenges and the ways we are dealing with them, attacking them, and
sooner or later, with the help of modern science and medicine,
understanding “the paradox of the immune system.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Acknowledgements

Writing a book during an active pandemic on such a timely topic as
immunology has proved to be a unique challenge. The constant flood of
new information, virtually daily, caused me to have to make additions
and amendments to chapter after chapter in order to keep the information
up to date. The only way I was able to do that was to rely heavily on
the powerful science and medical search engines of PubMed, Medline, and
MedlinePlus databases provided by the U.S. National Institute of
Medicine, National Institute of Health, Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, and by the powerful search engines, Google Scholar,
ScienceDirect, Scopus, and others. As with any technical, scientific
author, I must acknowledge and thank these resources for providing the
current literature base needed to make this book a reality.

Beyond the exhaustive scientific and medical research I did to complete
this book, I tried to understand the subject from a personal level as
well. To wit, I relied heavily upon many conversations I had with a dear
friend who suffers from an autoimmune disease; from multiple friends
(and family members) who were infected by the coronavirus; and from two
good friends, both now deceased, who suffered through battles with
cancer. All of these friends and family members gave me insights into
their disease conditions which helped me qualify my discussions, and
hopefully provide some empathy to help all of us feel the devastation
these diseases bring upon peoples' lives.

Proofing this manuscript was a long and arduous task, one some friends
and relatives started but never completed. The ones that did get through
it all advised me that the volume of information was formidable and
difficult to absorb in one reading. To address this critique, I did a
number of adjustments in the text that I describe in the Preface. I
thank all of those who advised me on this and helped make a rather
complex topic, hopefully a little more “user friendly.” But I must
single out one reviewer, Mary Zirakparvar, a scientist herself, who
professionally, diligently, and thoroughly proofed the grammar,
punctuation, syntax, and mostly, the scientific content for accuracy.
Mary made the book better and I deeply appreciate her resolute effort.

My thanks once again go to the professional editing staff of Elsevier
with whom I have worked on multiple projects over the years and all of
whom have always provided the highest quality service in the kindest,
most courteous and most thoughtful manner to a “not so patient” author.
My particular thanks for their efforts go to Linda Versteeg-Buschman,
the acquisition editor for this book who worked through challenging
pandemic conditions to move the book project forward. A special thank
you to the editorial project manager, Matthew Mapes for recognizing the
need for a timely, expedited process, given the nature of the book's
subject matter relative to the health crisis the world is facing. And
finally, my thanks to Maria Barnard, the production manager for a
commanding and determined effort to get the job done right; and to Mark
Rogers, the art editor for producing a well-designed cover and
high-quality illustrations. Overall, it was a first-class effort by a
first-class team. Thank you all.

And finally, a very special thanks to my wife, Stephanie, for allowing
me the time to do the work and research necessary to complete this book
in a timely manner. She understands and tolerates my pertinacious work
habits and I love her for that and for the life we have shared together
for over 53 years.

Three reasons to understand the immune system

First…

Along with our brain (our central nervous system), our immune system is
the apotheosis of our existence.

Understanding it makes us stronger.

Second…

Our human strengths and weaknesses are represented in the “paradox of
the immune system.”

Understanding them helps us deal better with our health and our
vulnerabilities.

Third…

We all share a sophisticated immune system, its benefits, and its risks.

It is the enduring, unifying system that brings all races, colors,
religions, and ethnicities together in one humanity.

Section 1

Our friendly immune system

Section 1 Our friendly immune system

1. Introduction

The trendy, overused saying (I already used it once in the Preface, and
I'll try to make this is the last) of our times is, “In the spirit of
full disclosure….” So…“in the spirit of full disclosure,” I want to
admit to you that “immunology and genetics are my passion.” I say that
not necessarily because I have devoted the past 35 years (more than
half) of my professional life to these sciences that now share a
dominant role in health care and the biosciences. Rather, my feelings
about these two sciences emanate from what they mean to the human race.

The immune system and its activity is effectively dictated and
controlled by the human genome (our complete set of genes). Together
they represent the most valuable, sophisticated, and elegant sciences in
humankind, ones from which every member of the human race enjoys the
benefits. They keep us well throughout our lives and help professionals
understand and learn more about how to enhance health and wellness
through them. They also protect us from a world of demons (antigens)
that endanger our health every moment of every day. And when those
demons overwhelm us, all too often with abnormalities like genetic
mutations and autoimmune diseases, those very same systems work that
much harder to heal us, sometimes successfully and sometimes, not.

This book will limit itself to the immune system alone and its
challenges, primarily because, together the sciences of immunology and
genetics are just too vast to address in one volume. Nonetheless, the
intimate relationship between the two sciences demands that some
discussions on genetics related to the immune system (i.e.,
immunogenetics and immunogenomics) must be included. Thus, along with
the immunology concepts we will consider, my approach will be to include
genetic considerations where needed in the narrative as well as
introduce the basic science and concepts of genetics in a separate
Chapter (3) in this Section (1) of the book. This will set the tone and
the information needed for our Section 2 discussions about the immune
system as “the enemy within us.” Those discussions will include a
substantial amount of genetic science, particularly in the ever-growing
fields of immunogenetics and immunogenomics. I hope that the Chapter 3
information on basic genetics will provide succor for you in its Section
2 clinical applications.

Some of my proselytizing about the immune system and genetics in health
care may not mean much to you now, but I would ask you to come back and
reread this Introduction after you have read the book (I'll even remind
you at the end). By then, I think you may love immunology and genetics
as much as I do.

1: The innate (aka “natural”) immune system and immunity

Abstract

Not a day goes by that people aren't besieged by words like antigens,
antibodies, cytokines, T-, and B-cells in the media and in conversation.
These immunologic terms are not accompanied by simple explanations
because these are just not simple concepts. In fact, they're downright
complicated and require a careful narrative. And to boot, some of the
concepts often include dichotomies, even contradictions that constitute
“the paradox of the immune system.” The innate and adaptive immune
systems are our “best friend and worst enemy.” The innate immune system
acts as our best friend protecting us and maintaining our health and
wellness in the face of constant threats from trillions of antigens
(“nonself,” foreign substances, and stress). When innate immunity is
insufficient to withstand an antigenic attack, the adaptive immune
system steps up to help in our protection. The only problem with that is
the adaptive immune system, paradoxically, begins to “dysregulate” our
immunity and becomes “our worst enemy.” This first chapter will present
our friend, the innate immune system.

Keywords

Antibody; Antigen; T and B cells; Cytokine; Dysregulate; Innate
immunity; Nonself; Paradox; Self; T cells

The environment is everything that isn't me.

Albert Einstein.

1. Some simple definitions of the immune system, immunology, the immune response, and immunity

This is a story about all of us, young and old. It actually begins
billions of years ago, but we don't have time to cover the evolutionary
trail from the beginning. Rather, let's begin in the 1800s, a mere
couple of 100 years ago when gentlemen like Louis Pasteur, Edward
Jenner, Elie Metchnikoff, Paul Ehrlich, and others, all considered the
“fathers of immunology,” discovered and described the cells of the
immune system, all of which had been developing over those billions of
years that I mentioned. With all due respect to these brilliant
“fathers,” I am not going to spend much time on them either. Rather,
let's fast-forward to the 1970s when another bunch of very bright guys
(Ralph Steinman, Niels Jerne, Anthony Fauci [yep, that Anthony Fauci],
Peter Doherty, Susumu Tonegawa, and a bunch of other Nobel laureates)
started to fill in the blanks that still existed, in spite of, or
because of a billion years of development. Today, thanks to the
continued flow of gifted scientists and amazing technologies, the Human
Genome Project, new drugs, artificial intelligence (AI), and something
that has come to be known as immunotherapy, we have arrived at a new
level of healthcare. Today, and into the future, our understanding and
control of our immune system, as our best friend and sometimes worst
enemy, will guide us to better health and wellness.

The immune system is a highly complex system of organs, cells, and
chemistry. The study and functions of that system referred to as
immunology can be defined simply as a battle of ‘self’ versus “nonself.”
In this wonderful world of ours, there is “you” … and everything else.
Now, think of “you” as “self” and everything else as foreign to you or
“nonself” (those “enemies” I mentioned in the Introduction). Nonself can
be a substance (any substance), a chemical, an infectious agent known as
a pathogen, (e.g., a virus, bacteria, etc.), a toxin (airborne,
ingested, in contact with your body, etc.). That nonself can even be a
nonsubstance like stress (mental, emotional, physical, as in injury, or
physiological—more on this in Section 2). Virtually anything external to
you, the nonself-stuff (called an "antigen"), your body (self)
interprets as foreign. It's kind of like a “yin and yang” metaphor where
self is good and nonself (an antigen) is evil.

Simply stated, the immune response that we'll be talking about
throughout the rest of this book is our immune system's reaction to an
antigen. That response is our body fighting off the antigen. And that
fight is referred to as immunity or simply our body's efforts to
overcome antigens and maintain our health. That immunity functions as a
natural, inherent process of our body and is called “innate (or natural)
immunity.” But sometimes our innate immunity is insufficient to overcome
an antigen, so it begins to “adapt” itself to function in specialized
ways to increase its effectiveness (“gets tougher”) and this level is
called “adaptive (or acquired) immunity.” We're introducing a number of
names for immunity here, but from now on we'll stick to innate or
adaptive immunity or immune response. In the pages and chapters ahead,
we will be spending a considerable amount of time discussing self and
nonself, and innate and adaptive immunity, for better and for worse.

2. Development (embryology and beyond) of the immune system [1]

It's fascinating to realize that the immune system is intimately
involved in the association of the mother and the fetus during
pregnancy. The immune system of mother and fetus is precisely timed to
achieve the best outcomes for both. The mother's innate immune system
response is aggressive during the first 12 weeks of the pregnancy to
support and establish successful implantation of the embryo. The womb is
lined with the mother's immune cells and that creates a process called
“passive immunity” where chemicals (particularly things like
immunoglobulins IgG and IgM which we'll be talking about in a moment)
help the fetus get fully established. After that, during the following
15 weeks of the pregnancy, the mother's immune system suppresses itself
to allow for the fetal cells to grow as the fetus develops its own
immune system (virtually two immune systems functioning in one body).
Finally, an aggressive immune system response by the mother returns near
delivery, when certain chemicals Mom produces called proinflammatory
mediators (more to come on those) help with the labor response.

The womb is a sterile environment and thus no antigens, so the fetal
immune system does not need to function. Thus, it is safely suppressed
to reduce any potential reactions to the mother's cells which could be
interpreted by the developing fetus as foreign (nonself). Meanwhile,
fetal cells are crossing the placenta and can be detected in Mom between
the fourth and fifth week of pregnancy, and will remain for years, even
decades, after she has given birth. The presence of these genetically
distinct fetal cells from baby to Mom is called microchimerism (thought
to enhance mother's milk). This exchange of cells from the fetus to the
pregnant woman provides a possible explanation as to why a mother's
immune system does not reject the growing fetus. It's also an
interesting phenomenon where the DNA of those fetal cells, male or
female, is detectable in the mother (especially her brain) for the rest
of her life. This is referred to as “pregnancy brain” and is believed to
have lifelong effects (positive, like added protection, and negative,
like lifelong potential autoimmune effects in the mother [more on that
in Chapter 5]).

Beyond the embryology, after birth the immune system continues to
develop robustly until about age seven to eight when it reaches its
strongest levels. At that point, general health, proper diet, and
exercise will maintain a strong immune system for many years thereafter.
But as we age, to be expected as with so many things, the system will
begin to slow down a bit in response time and of course, it can be
dangerously impaired with any form of immunocompromising disorders (to
be discussed in detail in Section 2). But, by and large, the immune
system continues to be our principal defense mechanism throughout life,
notwithstanding increased risks of certain diseases (e.g., cancers) due
to its slower response times with aging.

2.1. X chromosome inactivation (XCI) or “lyonization”

Yet another immunogenomic phenomenon of enormous consequences (as you
will read about numerous times throughout this book) is also occurring
during early embryologic (preimplantation) development of the female
embryo. All normal human beings have 46 paired chromosomes in each cell,
of which one pair (the 23rd) is called the sex chromosomes. Females have
2 X chromosomes, while males have one X and one Y chromosome (more on
this in Chapter 3). Through a process called X chromosome inactivation
(XCI) or “lyonization” (named after the British geneticist, Mary Lyon
who hypothesized the theory in 1961 [2,3]), the lyonization theory
proposes that one of the 2 X chromosomes in the female is randomly and
permanently inactivated (“silenced”) in most (but not all) of her cells,
with the exception of her lifelong reproductive egg cells. This process
prevents female cells from having twice as many gene products from the X
chromosomes as males [4]. It provides the upside potential in females
for double protection against certain diseases, but it also introduces
the increased risk of negative immunogenic influences (in Chapter 5).
The overwhelming abundance of a unique RNA molecule (microRNA or miRNA)
on the X chromosome represents one of the greatest etymological meanings
of “the paradox of the immune system.”

Without getting any further “into the weeds” (for now at least), let me
just say that the X-chromosome has approximately 155 million base pairs
(nucleotides), which translate to about 900–1400 genes that account for
about 5% of the total DNA of a cell versus the Y chromosome at about 70
genes and carries about 58 million base pairs or about 2% of the total
DNA of a cell [5]. As will be discussed in Chapter 3, the transcription
and translation of proteins by the genetic code of these genes (you can
take a peek at Fig. 3.6 if you would like a preview) will have dramatic
implications in phenotype (physical traits) development, immunity,
autoimmune diseases, and cancers. We will elaborate on this exquisite
and multidimensional process in our discussion about chromosomes, the
microbiome and its association with autoimmune diseases (especially in
females) in Chapter 3; again, regarding the X chromosome, microRNA and
their association with autoimmune diseases in Chapter 5; and finally,
about their role in cancers in Chapter 6.

3. The gross and microanatomy of the immune system

Now for some basic biology of the immune system, the components of which
are not too difficult to follow, but worth enumerating because they
create a complex network. The involved organs of the body can be
considered the gross anatomy of the system. The array of cells,
chemicals, molecules, and proteins of the immune system are referred to
as its microanatomy, also referred to as its molecular biology.

3.1. Gross anatomy

The gross anatomy of the immune system comprises a number of
recognizable organs in the body, like the tonsils, adenoids, thymus,
spleen, lymph nodes, lymph vessels, appendix, and bone marrow. Fig. 1.1
will help you identify these structures, not that you'll need to
remember their locations but their functions in the system will pop up
somewhat regularly. Most of them are responsible for the development and
production of immune cells. The strongest cell-producing organs are the
thymus (producing the famous “T” cells, for “thymus”) and bone marrow
(producing an important white blood cell [WBC], the neutrophil and the
all-important “B” cells.–can you guess what the “B” stands for? Sorry,
that would be too easy. It actually comes from the "Bursa" of Fabricius,
a thymus-like lymphoid organ in birds (that's right, birds!) responsible
for the production and maturation of B cells (hematoporesis) and
processing environmental antigens. In humans, its equivalents are the
tonsils or lymphoid tissue in joints and the intestines [6]. (Hardly of
significant importance in this discussion, but a little piece of “fun
trivia.”). All of these immune organ functions become less productive
early in life (remember the peak for the immune system by age seven to
eight?) and after that, we depend mostly on the collective organs that
comprise the lymphatic system (glands and node throughout our body).

[ Figure 1.1  Organs of the immune system.A series of bodily organs are
most responsible for the development and production of immune cells. The
strongest cell-producing organs are the thymus (producing “T” cells for
“thymus”) and bone marrow (producing neutrophils and “B” cells). Source:
AIDS.gov, via Wikimedia Commons.]

Besides all of these body organs functioning as the production arm of
immune system cells, the innate (natural) immune system also uses gross
anatomical tissues like skin, tears, mucus secretions and mucus
membranes in its protective functions. Along with the innate immune
cells and an array of molecular biologic agents (to be discussed next),
these anatomical tissues serve as a first line of defense against the
bad guys (i.e., nonself-invading antigens).

3.2. Microanatomy (molecular biology)

I mentioned the neutrophil just above. This WBC (another name,
leukocytes) is a potent immune cell referred to as “the first responder”
for good reason as you will see in a moment. But collectively, all the
WBCs, particularly the lymphocytes define the critical cellular
component of the immune system (Fig. 1.2). Just for the record, let's
catalog these cells because you will be running into them again and
again from here on out. They are divided into two main types of cells:
(1) granulocyte cells (containing small intracellular protein granules)
include the lymphocytes or, the “infantry” of the immune system; and (2)
agranulocyte cells (no intracellular granules) that include neutrophils,
eosinophils, and basophils, residing almost entirely in the blood until
they become activated in an immune response. These tough little
lymphocytes (very little, from 6 to 14μm in diameter) include T cells, B
cells, and natural killer (NK) cells, monocytes, and macrophages (mature
monocytes) with about 70% of them residing in the blood (again, until
activated) and 30% in bodily tissues. One more granulocyte cell that you
will meet again later on is the mast cell (containing histamine and
heparin granules) and it resides in connective (supportive) tissue.

[ Figure 1.2  White blood cells (WBCs or Leukocytes).White blood cells
(WBCs or leukocytes) define the cellular component of the immune system.
They are divided into 2 main types of cells: (1) granulocyte cells
(containing small intracellular protein granules). and (2) agranulocyte
cells (containing no intracellular protein granules). Source: Louis J
Catania © 2022.]

Besides the catalog of WBCs that I just hit you with, let me take it one
step further. To really appreciate the enormous volume of immune cells
in our body, you first have to consider the total volume of all blood
cells (WBCs and red blood cells or RBCs), and you have to “think big.”
The total number of blood cells (and this doesn't include “somatic
cells,” the kind that make up the bodily tissues) approximates 37–44
trillion blood cells (that's with a “T”). Of that number, WBCs represent
“only” about 7%–8%, about half of which are neutrophils (so, about
3.5%–4% of the total). Now, if you do the math, that's about 6.5
trillion or 6.5×10¹² WBCs or immune cells (easier to use the exponential
form for numbers when dealing with trillions to avoid 12–15 zeros every
time). This astronomical number will come back numerous times in our
discussion as we consider the actions, reactions, and genetics of the
immune system. It's worth keeping it in mind because it helps in keeping
the magnitude of the reactions we'll be discussing in perspective.

Up ahead, we're going to discuss, in depth, the immune response with all
its cells, chemicals, and proteins. But first, let's consider for a
moment that magnitude I just mentioned of what's happening in our
bodies. For every antigen we experience in our lifetime (trillions of
them), our immune system will produce these protective cells, chemicals,
and proteins including antibodies, complement, and/or immunoglobulins
plus additional T and B cells, accumulating to>2×10¹² over a normal life
span. Most of these cells and proteins persist throughout our lives
(obviously a good thing, called the anamnestic memory response—more
later), that protects us against future attacks by the same antigen. All
told, it's really hard to get your head around the size of our immune
system.

4. Innate (aka “natural”) immune response and active immunity [7]

So now we have described the concept of self and nonself and how it
defines the basis of our active immune system (“active,” yet another
immune descriptor). By active immunity, we are talking about the natural
or innate actions the immune system (self) conducts in the face of a
foreign, nonself attack. At this point, we have already created three
labels for an immune response (active, innate and natural), all with the
same meaning. We'll be using “active immunity” again in a slightly
different context, so, for ease and accuracy of discussion, henceforth,
let's use “innate immune response” only (I chose innate vs. “natural”
because most of the literature uses innate). Now, let's describe this
exquisite innate immune process that everyone reading this book (and in
fact, everyone not reading this book as well, or simply, everyone on
planet earth) is experiencing, unless they're living in a sterile bubble
for protection against antigens (remember the hilarious Seinfeld episode
of “The bubble boy”?—October 7, 1992). But, I digress.

Let's assume you're in good health, well-nourished, in good physical
condition with a sound mind in a sound body. You could be sitting in a
chair reading (this book) and your body is constantly being bombarded by
foreign matter (remember the trillions of antigens I mentioned
previously?) in the form of dust, pollen, spores, virtually anything
airborne (including your kids and lord knows, all their germs), and
probably even some things you're rubbing against (in that chair), or
with your hands (and maybe your feet, if its summertime). Your body does
not like nonself-antigens, so it is constantly using its innate defenses
like the anatomical features (skin, tears, mucus and mucus membranes,
antiinfectious barriers, enzymes) and more so, a series of complex
cellular and chemical protective elements (coming below, so fasten your
seatbelts). That pretty much summarizes the “yin and yang” metaphor we
used back on page 4, where “self” is good and “nonself” (antigen) is
evil.

4.1. The science of “self” versus “nonself”

Let me apologize in advance for these next few pages as we dive a little
deeper into the immune system's parts (anatomy and microanatomy) and its
mechanics (physiology and molecular biology). It is arguably the most
complex system in our body (neurologists and brain surgeons might argue
that point) and its mechanics or its functions utilize a series of
cells, molecules, proteins, chemicals, and genes that begin to boggle
the mind. So, give these next few pages a shot and maybe even a reread
before moving on. I must be honest and tell you that you really have to
grasp these next basic concepts to understand the continuing progress of
immunity, for better and for worse.

Your body (self) recognizes nonself (antigens) through the series of
specialized white blood cells that we've discussed above (WBCs or
leukocytes), particularly macrophages, monocytes, and T-lymphocytes (or
just T cells). There are a whole bunch of very specialized T cells with
surface (protein) receptors that have specific functions. Let's quickly
review these T cells and their receptors and then revisit them as their
functions manifest in the immune response. The first type is the T
helper cells or T_(H) cells as we will refer to them from here on. The
main surface receptors on the T_(H) cell are human leukocytic antigens
(HLAs and more on this in a moment) and CD4, CD8, and others (CD is the
abbreviation for “cluster of deviation” or “classification determinant,”
a fact that I will not mention again and I suggest you forget
immediately, but not the HLA). The next T cell is the cytotoxic T cell
(T_(C) henceforth) also called the killer T-cell (no abbreviation on
that one) with CD8 receptors (and others); and the T suppressor or
T-regulatory cell (T_(S) or T_(REG)).

There are over 400 known CD receptor on T-cell surfaces and we'll not be
mentioning them all (obviously). But I do want to mention just a few
others here for a specific reason. These others include CD4, CD28, CD80,
CD86, CD40L, CD99, and CD152 (or CTLA-4) all on the T_(H) cell and CD8,
CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4, or CD152) and other
receptors on the T_(C) cell. I mention these extra receptors not to
confuse you (Right!), but because they all have a direct link to
autoimmune disease and cancer which we'll pick up on in Chapters 5 and 6
and I just want you to be able to make the connection back to this
discussion when we get there. So, as you can see, some of these surface
receptors can be bad hombres. One of them (appropriately named) is the
“programmed death (PD)” receptor (need I say more?). This nasty critter
can hook up with a molecule on cancer cells (the PDL or programmed death
ligand—a ligand being a molecule that binds to another molecule) and can
make some big trouble (like cancers). We'll postpone that discussion to
Chapter 6 as well. In the meantime, feel free to forget this bad
(“enemy”) stuff for the time being. But I think you can already see the
paradox between good and evil evolving. Now, back to the good stuff.

4.1.1. Major histocompatibility complex and the antigen presenting complex (APC)

Now, as promised, it's time to introduce genetics into this unfolding
story of immunology. I'd almost suggest that you jump to Chapter 3 and
read about genetics first and then back to this part, but rather than
disrupt this discussion on immunity, l will try to give you just the
basic elements you'll need to understand this very important (Nobel
Prize level important) immunogenic portion of this immune system
process. Then, when you get to Chapter 3, you can refer back if you'd
like to review this critical piece of immunology.

The major histocompatibility complex (MHC Class 1 and 2) are a group of
genes on everyone's DNA that read (called genetic coding) and interact
with surface receptor proteins (HLAs and CDs) to determine self and
nonself for that particular individual. The surface MHC gene CD
receptors on the macrophage WBCs (uniquely specific to each individual
human being) identify antigens specific to that given human being
(amazing isn't it? all evolutionary). Upon such identification, the MHC
Class 1 and 2 receptors activate and bind the individual's T_(H) CD
cells (MHC Class 1 to CD8 and Class 2 to CD4) to the antigens and the
macrophage's surface receptors (this is a process called “the immune
synapse,” a very, very big deal) to form what is termed an “antigen
presenting complex” (an APC—Fig. 1.3—Diagram #1). This APC is sometimes
referred to as a dendritic cell because of its microscopic “tree-like”
shape.

These APCs (or dendritic cells) are really, really, really important
because they will dictate most of the immune response going forward.
Suffice to say, this concept of MHC genes detecting self versus nonself
and guiding the production of specialized, programmed APCs was
significant enough to have been awarded the 1996 Nobel Prize in Medicine
to Australian, Peter Doherty, who had actually described the phenomenon
back in 1974. You have to give it to old Alfred Nobel, actually his
Swedish descendants, for owning up and delivering the Prize for this
enormous scientific achievement, even if 18 years later. Better late
than never.

[ Figure 1.3  Antigen presenting complex (Dendritic cell)—diagram
#1.When the human body identifies something as “nonself” white blood
cells (macrophages) and T-lymphocytes bind it to form an antigen
presenting complex that becomes the starting point for all immune
responses. (This figure is the first in a series of 9 diagrams that will
ultimately develop an overall flow diagram of the entire immune
system).]

4.1.2. The “TLR sentry” [8]

There is yet another very specialized protein surface receptor that I
must share with you at this time as well. (Now stay with me on this,
please). It's called the “toll-like receptor” or TLR. This receptor is
genetically encoded (programmed) from our MHC Class 1 and 2 genes
described above which allow our T cells to do what we've been talking
about as the main function of the immune system, that is to distinguish
between self and nonself and even between self and self (so that we
don't attack and destroy ourselves—most of the time—sounds paradoxical
doesn't it?). TLRs are particularly good at spotting the real bad guy
antigens like bacteria and viruses. So, you can see that this TLR is a
big deal in the world of immunity.

An additional characteristic of this elegant antigen recognition system
is an interesting feature that allows the T and B cells to determine
just how “dangerous” an antigen might be. Is the foreign nonself invader
apt to produce an increasing or virulent effect on the human host or is
it something the body can tolerate? Indeed, without such a
discriminatory capability, the immune system could easily interpret and
react to things like ingested nutrients, normal floral bacteria in the
gut (the microbiome—more in Chapter 3), digestive bacteria in our
intestines, and a world of “benign” foreign substances. Effectively, the
immune system could be overworking for no good reason or even for
counterproductive reasons (e.g., attacking normal flora).

The control mechanism to address this immune differentiating capability
(yet another paradox) between dangerous versus benign nonself substances
(or stress) was again created over hundreds of millions of years through
genetic coding of the TLR receptors. These surface receptor proteins are
genetically programmed to identify self versus nonself, pathogen versus
nonpathogen and also, dangerous versus “tolerable” antigens. With this
recognition, the TLR receptors provide the T and B cells with an
“attack” or “stand-down” signal. They truly are the “sentry” for the
paradox of “self versus nonself.” That's a rather sophisticated
characteristic of innate immunity, and it only took 500 hundred million
years to develop.

A great example of this immune tolerance attribute regards a universally
common infectious agent, the herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1). Upwards of
90% of all humans are infected with HSV-1 (the more common oral form,
that is, the good old fever blister on the lip kind vs. the “not so
good” genital HSV-2 form). The HSV-1 virus resides in a latent, inactive
form in various nerve ganglia in our bodies. It activates only with
additional antigenic stimuli (a trigger), particularly fatigue, stress,
illness, menstruation, or exposure to sunlight. This genetic TLR
characteristic of tolerance in the immune system explains why “innocent
antigens” (like HSV-1) are well tolerated, but do have the potential for
activation if provoked [9].

4.2. Active immunity

4.2.1. The first signal

OK. Now we have all the pieces in place to see how this elegant immune
system works. This first step in the innate immune response is a really
big deal because those APCs (trillions of them) start sending out
signals (#1) that are going to produce chemical messengers called
cytokines (things like interferon, interleukin—IL1,4,5,6
[Fig. 1.4–Diagram #2] that you've heard mentioned, but never knew
exactly what they were all about). Interferon proteins (IFN alpha [A],
beta [B], gamma [G], and lambda [L]) are particularly effective cytokine
(chemicals) that interact with certain genes (like the MHC Class 2 genes
to CD4 receptors) in the early stages of the innate immune response to
stimulate the “immune synapse” (the continued formation of APCs). It was
demonstrated back in the 1970s that the attack by a foreign substance on
normal, healthy cells stimulates an increase in interferon as well as
producing an antiviral protein that interferes (ergo, the name
“interferon”) with the production of viruses. (A little side note on
this. You'll notice in the first research Reviews at the end of this
Chapter, a malfunction in IFN-1 has been linked to increased severity in
SARS-CoV-2 infections). These cytokine proteins also produce a powerful
T-cell generator, which along with the APCs and neutrophils enhances the
innate immune system, thus creating multiple stimuli to an early and
effective immune response, but sometimes with consequences (might we be
seeing the very early signs of the potential “enemy” of our immune
system?”).

[ Figure 1.4  Early innate immune response—diagram #2.When the human
body identifies something as “nonself” it produces signal #1, a humoral
response (cytokines) that elicits B-lymphocytes cells that produce
antibodies (classic “Y” shaped icons) which bind and remove the
antigen.]

Such a potent chemical (humoral) cytokine reaction can produce some
inflammatory-like symptoms (to be discussed in Chapter 2), sometimes
causing some ill effects in the form of a fever and the patient feeling
less than 100% for a few days. But, as we will discuss (in Chapter 2),
this is the way the innate immune system works. We sometimes pay a small
price to stay healthy (a paradox in itself). Nonetheless, because of its
nontoxic, beneficial effects, in the late 1970s interferon became one of
the earliest (and highly effective) immunotherapeutic agents used
against an array of diseases from infections, to hepatitis, and even to
cancers. It had a market value of tens of billions of dollars after its
introduction and it is still widely prescribed, especially for certain
cancers to reduce the need for chemotherapies and their negative effects
(more in Chapter 6). The premise is that Immunotherapies (like
interferons) are using the natural body defenses and thus eliminating
the effects of toxic chemicals in chemotherapeutic regimes.

4.2.2. The cellular “attack”

Meanwhile, back at the cellular side of innate immunity, those activated
T_(H) cells now begin to show why they are the “infantry” of the immune
response. Through the chemical (cytokine) signals being produced
(specifically interleukin or IL-4, 5 and 6 from the macrophage on the
APC), with the help of WBC monocytes and those powerful neutrophils we
talked about earlier (specific for microbial pathogens), the T_(H) cells
proceed to do one of their most important functions. They activate
another group of lymphocytes beyond their T-cell brethren, the B₁ cells.
With T_(H) cells as the “infantry,” the B₁ cells take their rightful
place alongside the T cells as the “special forces” of the immune
system. This B cell begins the production of the “big guns” (alright,
enough with the military metaphors already!), the antibodies, the
critical protein molecules that will bind with and neutralize antigens.
Now, along with the T_(H), T_(S) and B cells, the antibodies, plus
humoral enzymes from the neutrophils (neutralizing chemicals to
inactivate toxins and infectious agents), those antigens don't stand a
chance. They're effectively carried off to lymph nodes where they will
be eliminated or destroyed (ingested) through a process called
phagocytosis by WBCs. Meanwhile, the T_(C) cells we mentioned above plus
other WBCs (eosinophils and basophils) are digesting and destroying any
remaining pathogens (top of Fig. 1.4–Diagram #2) in a process. This is
called Type IV cell-mediated immunity (more on this in Chapters 2 and
4).

Together, the T and B cells are constantly manufacturing millions of
copies of themselves, all of which continue to recognize and wipe out
the offending antigen. You can pretty much see that this aggressive and
cumulative process of innate immunity, in and of itself is usually all
that's needed to eliminate the antigen. Simultaneously, the B₁ cells are
also forming (germinating) a series of B-memory (B_(M)) cells and a
series of plasma cells that will continue to produce even more
antibodies (bottom of Fig. 1.4—Diagram #2). The B_(M) cells create a
long-term memory for recognizing the specific antigen they are
responding to and henceforth provide (for a lifetime) the anamnestic
memory we mentioned earlier. We'll talk more about that in Chapter 2,
but I think you can already begin to see the concept of vaccines
developing in this beautiful molecular biological process.

4.2.3. The antibody-encoding gene [10]

This description of the B-cell producing antibodies that bind with the
antigen bespeaks a simple question. How does that B cell know which
antigen it has the capacity to bind to and more so, to destroy? As with
many “simple questions” about the immune system, once again, this one
has its answer in our human genome (the complete set of genetic
information and instructions on how our body grows, develops, and
functions). It is all a product of human development (phylogeny) wherein
our genetic code has refined itself iteratively over eons of time into
trillions of specific cellular characteristics with distinct genetic
strands in our B cell genetically programmed to identify antigens it has
never previously encounter and produce antibodies that identify and bind
to the antigen's surface receptors and destroy the antigen. This is an
amazing feature of our genetic code called the antibody-encoding gene, a
discovery that won a guy named Susumu Tonegawa the 1987 Nobel Prize for
Physiology and Medicine. (Notice how these Nobel Prizes keep piling up
as we move further into immunology. And more to come). Basically, this
antibody-encoding gene explains how our immune system protects us
against all foreign, nonself antigens, never before encountered by our
bodies. Simply amazing!

This discovery has proven to be of enormous value in immunotherapies,
vaccinology, transplantation medicine, and especially autoimmune disease
(all covered in Section 2). But that is just one facet of the
relationship between our immune system and our human genome. As such, as
I mentioned in the introduction to this Section, Chapter 3 on basic
genetics and our genome will be very valuable in helping you understand
a little better, MHCs and those genetic relationships between the immune
system and our genome. It will also introduce the basic concepts of
immunogenetics and immunogenomics that we are mentioning here in this
chapter and will be presenting further in this Section 1 and throughout
Section 2. But first let us complete our discussion on basic immunology.

[ Figure 1.5  Continuing innate immune response—diagram #3.Cytokines
(and chemokines) start producing their own biochemical signals (#2) that
trigger a new series of T_(H), T_(S) (obviously the cells that will be
controlling and “suppressing” the reaction) and T-cytotoxic (T_(C), to
assist in destroying the antigen) lymphocyte cells.]

4.2.4. The chemical/humoral “attack” (second signal)

As they're released through the cell activity during the immune
response, the cytokines and chemokines (another type of chemical) start
producing their own biochemical signals (#2) that trigger a new series
of T_(H), T_(S) or T_(REG) cells (the cells that will be controlling and
“suppressing” or “modulating” the immune reaction), and T_(C) cells (the
cells assisting in destroying the antigen) (Fig. 1.5—Diagram #3).
Together this exquisite molecular biological innate immune system
process is your body's 24/7 defense apparatus. We might even label it
“our best friend.” [11] But we're just beginning.

In a continuum of immune activity, if and when the HLA and TLR receptors
recognize greater antigen risk, that is, infectious pathogens versus
noninfectious self, they begin to morph or “adapt” into a second innate
immune response signal (#2). This involves additional cytokines like
interleukins (particularly IL-2 and 6) which stimulate further T- and
B-cell production. And all this immune activity is helpful … to a point.
Too much of a good thing could turn bad, or even deadly in the form of
an autoimmune response (full discussion on this profound paradox in
Chapter 5). So, the innate immune system also needs some checks and
balances and ironically, they come in the form of the cytokines,
especially the interleukins we've been mentioning [12]. Many
interleukins (e.g., IL-1) serve as antiinflammatory mediators sometimes
called “the brakes on the innate response.” (Inflammation is the next
level of the immune system which we'll address in Chapter 2). The lack
of these inhibitory antiinflammatory mediators would lead to
uncontrolled innate immunity and a progenitor to advancing immunity,
autoimmunity (selfattacking self) and its serious, consequential
diseases, including cancers which will be discussed in Section 2.

All of these issues needed better understanding and scientific
considerations if we were to keep the immune system in balance and
provide a homeostatic (balanced) condition in human health. No less, a
popular contemporary name surfaced as a key figure in this challenge.
Dr. Anthony Fauci stepped up in 1980 and created the National Institute
of Health, Laboratory of Immunoregulation. Subsequently, in 1984 he was
named the Director of National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, a position he still holds today along with Chief Medical
Advisor to President Joe Biden. I would add here that Dr. Fauci's
accomplishments in immunology and Public Health are legendary. His work
in monoclonal antibodies, HIV-AIDs, ebola research, autoimmune diseases
and certainly, his impassioned efforts during the COVID-19 pandemic has
changed the face of healthcare and have made him a hero to many—myself
included. There will be more on Dr. Fauci's work in subsequent chapters.

4.2.5. The regulated immune system

Meanwhile, back at innate immunity, cellular elements (B cells,
B-idiotype cells, B-memory cells, plasma cells, NK cells) are all
continuously generating memory cells for future recognition and an
“anamnestic” response to antigens. But more so, these additional
cellular and chemical (humoral) elements are generating more and more
antibody proteins specific to the invading antigen, along with a very
complex complement system of immunoglobulin antibodies (IgA, IgG, IgM).
These antibodies are the most common in our body (IgG being the most
abundant) and are most important in fighting bacteria and viruses. All
of these molecules continue to bind and remove antigens through lysing,
opsonization, chemotactic activity and polymorphonuclear phagocytosis.
Collectively, we can refer to these well directed, protective immune
activities as a “regulated” immune system (Fig. 1.6—Diagram #4. Please
remember this diagram as it will serve as the basis for Figures 2.1, 2.2
and 2.3 in Chapter 2 and again in Chapters 5 and 6 . Trust me on this. I
promise it will make sense when we get there).

[ Figure 1.6  The adaptive (acquired) immune response—diagram #4.When
the innate immune system is unable to effectively remove the antigen, a
complex of events occur producing multiple forms of T and B cells and
plasma cells (antibody generating cells), immunoglobulins, natural
killer cells, complement proteins and cell-mediated responses to
eliminate the antigen.]

Driving this constant innate “regulating” process is the powerful neural
system's “downregulation” stimuli discussed in Chapter 4, page 87. But,
notwithstanding this great “regulated” system (still our friend) and
neural downregulation, you may notice in Fig. 1.6 some arrows heading
somewhere to the right of the diagram with labels like Type I, II, III,
IV. A famous old baseball pitcher, Satchel Paige once said, “Don't look
back. Something might be gaining on you.” As regards those “arrows,” at
about this point in the immune system, “something might be gaining on
us.” We'll be “looking back” in Chapter 2.

4.3. From “regulated to dysregulated”—from innate to adaptive immunity

Now, what if this great and powerful, regulated system doesn't quite do
the job of constraining or removing virulent, invading antigens from our
body? We'll mention causes in Chapter 2, and you probably know them
already: too much antigen; reoccurring antigen (how about smoking as an
example?); too powerful a pathogen (novel coronavirus is a good example
of that); or maybe, for some reason, our immune system isn't working
right (diet, environment [pollution, etc.], genetics)? We're not
finished, by a long shot. The indefatigable immune system, in
conjunction with the signal #1 and #2 innate immune response and neural
downregulation continue to stimulate an unremitting series of T_(H,)
T_(C), B lymphocytes, and cytokines, This generates more
antibody-producing cells like the plasma cells, NK and T_(S) and T_(C)
cells continue to respond to the invading antigen, particularly
pathogens like viruses. Meanwhile, immune cells, cytokines, antibody
proteins, complement proteins, and debris from apoptotic (dying) cells
are all beginning to pile up in our system and, low and behold our own
system begins to interpret that abnormal accumulation as “foreign.”
Let's face it, all that detritus doesn't belong in normal tissue and
thus, our “ying and yang” metaphor is turning into a “who's the good guy
and who's the bad guy” antigen-antibody response. To wit, yet another
highly complex antibody process starts working.

The combination of all these antigen-antibody generating processes that
started with the APC and the innate immune response has clearly
graduated or has begun to “adapt” themselves to a new level of immunity.
Credit for recognizing and describing this process goes to a brilliant
Canadian researcher, Dr. Ralph Steinman for identifying the dendritic
cell (the APC) progression from an innate (regulated) immunity into a
“dysregulated” immunity. This new level of immunity can be considered a
new type of immune response, indeed a dysregulated response. That
response is appropriately referred to as the adaptive (or acquired)
immune response. While innate immunity continues its robust, protective
efforts to defeat “nonself,” a fight it wins most of the time, if it
starts losing ground, we begin to rely on yet another, even more potent
immune system, adaptive immunity.

So now, with an understanding of the regulated, innate immune system,
“our best friend,” let's move on to the dysregulated, adaptive
(acquired) immune system (henceforth to be called the adaptive immune
system, again consistent with the standard literature's lexicons). In
the adaptive immune system, we are introduced to a “friend” to a degree,
but at the same time (again, paradoxically) a kind of medical science
analog to Robert Louis Stevenson's Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. Here, the
metaphor portrays Dr. Jekyll as our innate immune system or, our “best
friend,” while the evil Mr. Hyde corresponds to the equivalent of the
adaptive immune system or, “our mercurial adversary.” Yeah, I know, a
bit of a dramatic stretch, so you'll have to use your imagination.
That's the best I can do for an appropriate metaphor as our paradox
unfolds.

5. Brief research summaries on the innate immune system

(Reference citations for each research study presented below can be
found in its corresponding footnote. Also, a listing of available
scientific reference sources and databases used by the author are
included in the book's Acknowledgments.)

-   1. Notwithstanding labeling the innate immune system “our best
    friend,” we have to be careful about jumping to conclusions too
    quickly. Of interest here, is some COVID-19 research that continues
    to find possible causes to the more severe cases of the novel
    coronavirus in humans. An interesting finding has come to light
    regarding one of the innate immune response's interferons (IFN),
    specifically IFN-1 [13].
-       Autoantibodies are antibodies generated by a person's own body
    rather than in response to an antigen (more on these and on COVID-19
    in Section 2). These autoantibodies, found in up to 10.2% of the
    general population, seem to block or cause a malfunction of IFN-1
    and possibly other cytokines. This innate anomaly in IFN-1 has been
    attributed to at least 3.5% of patients with life-threatening
    COVID-19 disease. Could this be a sign of the innate immune system
    also functioning as “the enemy within us?” We'll be discussing that
    in greater detail in Section 2.
-   2. Research in the field of immunology (and genetics), especially
    with the help of AI and our quest to understand infectious disease
    (for obvious reasons), is rapidly advancing our understanding of the
    immune system and its clinical effects on our bodies. There will be
    more discussion of research in Section 2, but let me give you some
    brief practical examples of the benefits being realized that
    illustrate the direct value this AI research is having in our lives
    already. I'll use two quick research studies relative to the innate
    immune responses to illustrate those values.
-       AI is being used in many immunological fields for its analytic
    abilities for antigen and phenotype (observable characteristics of
    an individual) detection, predicting prognosis, and treatment
    outcomes, etc. Algorithms have been developed to predict the outcome
    of interactions and classification at the immune molecular levels.
    Phenotype detection is an example of the classification abilities of
    AI for cellular classification to determine the presence of
    particular disorders or their outcomes. Potential regulatory
    mechanisms and identifying immunogenic prognostic markers for breast
    cancer (BC) were used to construct a prognostic signature for
    disease-free survival of BC based on using AI algorithms.
    Differentially expressed immune genes were identified between normal
    tissues and tumor tissues. The AI survival prediction system
    identified 17 immune genes as potential prognostic biomarkers that
    might be potential candidates for immunotherapy targets in BC
    patients. These AI survival predictive systems will be helpful to
    improve individualized treatment decision-making [14]
-   3. As we've discussed, active T cells in our body are capable of
    destroying antigens. So being able to distinguish active T cells
    from depleted (thus inactive) T cells is clinically valuable,
    especially in cell donors. A form of imaging (autofluorescence) can
    make this distinction, though difficult, between T-cell activity in
    a nondestructive manner by detecting changes in the metabolic cell
    mechanisms (ribosomes, mitochondria, etc.). An AI program using
    powerful graphic processing units (GPUs) has demonstrated methods
    that can accurately classify T-cell activity among human T-cell
    donors. The AI network classifiers were “trained” (millions of image
    iterations) on nonbiological images (pictures of T cells). Adapting
    these pretrained AI networks for active versus inactive T-cell
    classification provided substantially better performance than
    traditional methods of autofluorescence images alone, thus advancing
    the science of cell transfer (discussed in Chapter 5, page 134)
    [15].

Chapter highlights (key points and paradoxical-related information)

-   1. The concept of self and nonself (“foreign”) is the eternal
    paradox of the immune system.
-   2. T cells and their surface receptors are the guardians of our
    health but some are directly linked to disease like the “programmed
    death (PD)” receptor related to cancer as one example.
-   3. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are “the sentry” of the immune system
    in helping to distinguish between self and nonself.
-   4. TLRs determine dangerous versus “tolerable” antigens, and provide
    the T- and B-cells in innate immunity with an “attack” or
    “stand-down” signal.
-   
-   5. Antigen presenting complexes (APCs) generate signals (#1 and #2)
    that produce cells (T, B, plasma, killer and antibodies) and
    chemicals (cytokine, chemokines, etc.) that can sometimes begin to
    accumulate and appear as “foreign” to the innate immune system.
-   6. The normal “regulated” innate immune system can become confused
    as to “who are the good guys and who are the bad guys?”
-   7. The system can begin to generate an increasing antigen-antibody
    response as it interprets “too much self” as foreign.
-   8. The innate immune system begins to “adapt” to continue providing
    protection.
-   9. As part of this “adaptation” an acute clinical inflammatory
    response develops to defend against too much foreign antigen or too
    much self (“autoantigen”) causing us to usually pay only a small
    price to remain healthy.
-   10. But in its effort to protect, the “adapting” innate immune
    system can “dysregulate” and lead to the “adaptive immune response”
    and to serious problems.

References

1. Park J.E, Jardine L, Gottgens B, Teichmann S.A, Haniffa M. Prenatal
development of human immunity.  Science . May 8, 2020;368(6491):600–603.

2. Lyon M.F. Gene action in the X-chromosome of the mouse (Mus musculus
L.).  Nature . April 22, 1961;190:372–373.

3. Carrel L, Brown C.J. When the Lyon(ized chromosome) roars: ongoing
expression from an inactive X chromosome.  Philos Trans R Soc Lond B
Biol Sci . Nov 5, 2017;372(1733):20160355.

4. MedlinePlus, .  X chromosome . U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services National Institutes of Health; August 18, 2020.

5. Easter C.  X and Y Chromosome . National Human Genome Research
Institute; April 4 2014.

6. Ribatti D, Crivellato E, Vacca A. The contribution of Bruce Glick to
the definition of the role played by the bursa of Fabricius in the
development of the B cell lineage.  Clin Exp Immunol . 2006
Jul;145(1):1–4.

7. The Innate Immune System, .  Immunopaedia . 2019.

8. Fitzgerald K.A, Kagan J.C. Toll-like receptors and the control of
immunity.  Cell . 2020;180(6):1044–1066 19.

9. Ma Y, He B. Recognition of herpes simplex viruses: toll-like
receptors and beyond.  J Mol Biol
. 2014;426(6):1133–1147. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.11.012.

10. Lu R.M, Hwang Y.C, Liu I.J, et al. Development of therapeutic
antibodies for the treatment of diseases.  J Biomed Sci . 2020;27:1.

11. Ibid. The innate immune system; n.d. 6.

12. Justiz Vaillant A.A, Qurie A. Interleukin. In:  StatPearls
[internet] . Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; January
2021 PMID: 29763015.

13. Meffre E, Iwasaki A. Interferon deficiency can lead to severe
COVID.  Nature . 2020;587:374–376. .

14. Zhang Z, Li J, He T, et al. Bioinformatics identified 17 immune
genes as prognostic biomarkers for breast cancer: application study
based on artificial intelligence algorithms.  Front Oncol . March 31,
2020;10:330.

15. Wang J, Walsh A.J, Skala C, et al. Classifying T cell activity in
autofluorescence intensity images with convolutional neural networks. 
J Biophot . August 15, 2019;13(3).

2: The adaptive (aka “acquired”) immune system

from friend to foe

Abstract

The purpose of the immune system is simple—protect the human organism
from foreign (antigenic) invasion and resultant disease. The innate
immune response (“our best friend”) does a great job of accomplishing
that defense under most circumstances. But sometimes, innate immunity
confronts an adversary (a pathogen) that overwhelms it and produces a
“dysregulated,” adaptive immune response. The first clinical effect is
acute inflammation with an array of familiar signs and symptoms (pain,
redness, swelling, sometimes fever). If not reversed within days to
weeks, this negative pathological condition progresses from the acute
state to its more devastating successor, chronic inflammation (“our
worst enemy”), and the progenitor of all human disease. This chapter
presents the clinical, histological, and pharmacological stages and
basic immunotherapeutic efforts to arrest and reverse the “inflammatory
cascade.” Unsuccessful efforts allow the adaptive immune system and
chronic inflammation to begin an inexorable, pathological course toward
autoimmune disease, cancers, and the ravages of infectious pandemics
like COVID19.

Keywords

Acute inflammation; Adaptive immunity; Antigenic; Chronic inflammation;
Dysregulate; Fever; Pain; Redness; Swelling

It's not whether you get knocked down. It's whether you get up again.

Vince Lombardi.

1. The path to “dysregulation”

Wouldn't it be nice if our body won all its battles against antigens?
Needless to say, life doesn't work that way. Sometimes, the innate
(natural) immune system can't quite handle the load. Maybe, for some
genetic, pathological (disease) or environmental reason (e.g., smoking—I
always love to include that) your immune system is compromised
(“immunocompromised”) or weakened or suppressed (“immunosuppression”).
Perhaps the antigen is not being removed effectively (persistent
cause—smoking, pollution, allergic to something), or it keeps
reoccurring (reexposure) as the innate system tries to eliminate it. Or
maybe the antigen is over abundant or too pernicious (virulent) for the
innate immune response to overcome it. In such conditions, after a few
days to a week of feeling “not so great,” the strength of the human
immune system begins to demonstrate more aggressive activity called the
“adaptive immune response.” All in all, this adaptive immune system
serves as a powerful defender and protector … to a point.

Adaptive immunity is more vigorous than the innate form. Its intensity
and duration are controlled by the patient's genetic makeup (notice how
I move from “person” to “patient” about here?). As adaptive immunity
advances, it begins to disrupt the homeostasis (maintenance of a stable
condition) of your body and your overall immune system. This disruption
is also referred to as “dysregulation” of the immune system.

But notwithstanding such disruption, four specific mechanisms that
produce positive effects in adaptive immunity are believed to still be
at work. First is something called “feedback inhibition” where removal
of the antigen reduces its innate immune stimulus and thus decreases
production of antibodies and cytokines, effectively reducing and
reversing the response. The second is the neuroendocrine and neurogenic
pathways that modulate cytokine production and reduction
(“downregulation”) to control the immune response. This complex
neurological control mechanism is the ultimate regulatory hierarchy for
chronic inflammation and will be discussed in Chapter 4, page XXX. The
third mechanism is when T-suppressor cells (remember T_(S,) also
referred to as T regulatory or T_(reg) cells) reduce T-helper cells
(T_(H)) and thus produce a commensurate reduction in B-cell activity
(which is controlled by T-helper cells, as you'll recall from the innate
immune discussion in Chapter 1). It's a bit of “connecting the dots,”
but the result is worth the trip, that is, a reduction in a dysregulated
immune response.

The fourth mechanism for reestablishing a regulated immune system is a
very complex genetic mechanism creating a system of idiotype
antigen-specific B cells called the “Idiotype-Anti-idiotype Regulatory
Circuit. This is a process that selfgenerates, through genetic cloning,
creating its own immunogenic stimuli that induces anti-idiotype-specific
antibodies (“antibodies 1, 2, etc.”) that establish the antibody
idiotype-specific regulatory circuit. Confused? Don't worry, so are many
scientists who have been studying this extraordinary complex process for
years. The process remains the center of much immunology research that
has far-reaching implications, especially in vaccines and cancer
research. Because of its importance and value in infectious disease
(i.e., vaccines for pandemics) and its value in cancer research, let's
postpone its description here and revisit this important aspect of
adaptive immunity with a fuller discussion (with illustrations) in
Chapter 6 on cancer and Chapters 7 (on infectious pandemics).

2. Acute inflammation

Failure to remove an offending antigen in a timely manner, or
malfunction of any one of the four mechanisms described above (feedback
inhibition, neurogenic modulation, T_(S) cells, and genetic cloning) can
lead to a pathophysiological response (i.e., an abnormal bodily process)
resulting in a clinical effect you have heard about and undoubtedly
experienced yourself, called acute inflammation. The word “acute” refers
to symptoms and conditions of rapid onset and usually of short duration.
This “dysregulation” of the immune system could lead to a more
prolonged, destructive process referred to as chronic inflammation
(chronic simply meaning a prolonged condition). This later level of
adaptive immunity, that is, chronic inflammation has potentially
devastating consequences and is the process I mentioned in the Preface
as the basis of all disease. We will be taking this up in detail in
Section 2, Chapter 4.

These advancing clinical (inflammatory) effects of adaptive immunity and
their various potential endpoints are the next level of active immunity
(remember that was the generic term introduced in Chapter 1 for innate
and adaptive immunity). So, adaptive immunity represents the second half
of our earlier stated paradox about the immune system (“best friend and
worst foe”). Adaptive immunity could indeed be considered “our most
dangerous foe.” (NB: All inflammation, acute and chronic is
characterized in medical terminology by the suffix “ … i t i s.” Thus,
any condition mentioned, henceforth, under any disease category with the
suffix “ … itis” [and there are a lot more of them coming up] should be
considered an inflammation.)

2.1. Immunopathophysiology (“dysregulation” and hypersensitivity)

We can look at adaptive immunity as a race to eliminate the bad guy
(antigens), a competition which, in most cases (given an otherwise
healthy person), the combined innate and adaptive immune systems will
win. If, however, the underlying health of the patient is not adequate
enough to sustain the activity of the adaptive immune response, things
could begin to deteriorate or “dysregulate.”

Among the cellular reactions associated with the adaptive immune
response (all those T's and B's and so on), there are four classic
“types” of “hypersensitivity reactions” (Coomb's Gell classification
referred to as Type I to Type IV—remember Fig. 1.6 and Satchel Paige?).
These hypersensitivity reactions (also referred to as “overreactions”
because the immune system is now beginning to go beyond its basic
“protective” functions) precipitate the next phase of immunity or the
“inflammatory cascade” (diagrammed and discussed below in Fig. 2.1).
Each overreaction is induced by different types of antigen categories
and each characterized by specific cellular responses and “types” of
immunoglobulin antibodies [1]. The four types (always designated by
Roman numerals—why? I have no idea) include

-   Type I: The immediate, allergic (or anaphylactic) hypersensitivity
    response;
-   Type II: The cytotoxic hypersensitivity reaction;
-   Type III: The immune-complex hypersensitivity reaction; and
-   Type IV: The cell-mediated, delayed reaction

All four of these hypersensitivity reactions (I like the term
“overreaction” better because it more accurately describes these
reactions, but “hypersensitivity reaction” is the scientifically
preferred term, so I'll stick with it … but cheat occasionally with a
parenthetical “overreaction” if I think it helps the discussion). These
hypersensitivity reactions usually commence during the acute
inflammatory stage of the adaptive immune process (which we pretty much
described at the end of Chapter 1 (page 20) under the section “From
regulated to dysregulated—from innate to adaptive immunity”). Back there
we described the more challenging molecular biology of the process which
I'm hoping you understood. Now we'll get to the interesting clinical
process which you'll be able to relate to far more than the
cellular-chemical stuff. This is the manifestation (the pathophysiology)
of all that molecular activity. It's the acute clinical phase or the
reactions people see (and feel) as their immune system becomes more real
to them (and us).

[ Figure 2.1  The inflammatory cascade—diagram #5.The inflammatory
cascade is a pharmacological array of cellular and humoral elements
producing a pharmacodynamic process leading to the clinical
manifestations of acute inflammation. Source: Louis J Catania © 2022. ]

But allow me to forewarn you at this point. The more advanced and
serious pathophysiological characteristics for each of the four types of
hypersensitivity reactions will manifest far more distinctly during the
chronic or continuing inflammatory process. I will describe each of the
hypersensitivity types here, but we will be revisiting them in more
depth in the discussion on chronic inflammation in Chapter 4. And trust
me. Given the magnitude of the chronic inflammatory process on human
health, you'll want to understand inflammation at its earlier (simpler)
acute phases to better appreciate its profound effects on human health
if and when it progresses. So now, given your Chapter 1 basis in the
anatomy, physiology, immunology, and pathophysiology of active immunity
(remember that generic term for combined innate and adaptive immunity?),
let's discuss the nexus between all that immunobiology and the first
classic, clinical level of immunology. First some quick descriptions of
the hypersensitivity reactions themselves [2].

2.1.1. Type I: the immediate, allergic (or anaphylactic) hypersensitivity response

This is the most common reaction, produced by an antigen referred to as
an “allergen.” Examples of this response include hay fever, eczema,
hives, asthma, food allergy, insect bites and stings, dust, pollen, and
on and on. Like its antigen cousin, the allergen can be inhaled,
ingested, or enter through the skin. After a susceptible person is
exposed to an allergen, the body starts producing a large quantity of
IgE antibodies. This results in the reoccurrence of the allergic
(anamnestic) response, sometimes with increasing intensity with each
reexposure to the allergen. Included among its cytokines, are histamine,
eosinophil complement, and heparin, which along with other inflammatory
symptoms, produce itching. With the allergic response, symptoms can also
include sneezing, and congestion from the release of histamine that is
caused by IgE degranulating mast cells (cells that have histamine
granules on their surface). In its most severe form, allergic
hypersensitivity can produce a life-threatening condition called
anaphylaxis (massive accumulation of Type I cytokines) that can cause
blood pressure to drop suddenly, and airways narrowing, thereby blocking
breathing (anaphylactic shock) [3].

2.1.2. Type II: the cytotoxic hypersensitivity reaction

Type II cytotoxic hypersensitivity reaction (sometimes referred to as
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity [ADCC]) involves mainly
IgM or IgG antibodies, natural killer (NK) cells and macrophages
directed against antigens that cause cell destruction by complement
activation (back in Chapter 1, Fig. 1.6). Type II reactions occur within
hours of exposure and usually last for a day or so, but could be
prolonged. Common forms include blood transfusion reactions and drug
sensitivities such as penicillin.

2.1.3. Type III: the immune-complex hypersensitivity reaction

Type III, immune-complex hypersensitivity, is a reaction mediated by the
formation of antigen-antibody aggregates called “immune complexes.”
These reactions are not mediated by antibodies but rather involve the
interaction of T cells, monocytes, and macrophages, sometimes (just to
confuse us) also referred to as cell-mediated reactions (Type IV). The
reaction can take hours, days, or even weeks to develop (into chronic
inflammation), depending on whether or not there is anamnestic memory
from previous antigen.

The smaller immune complexes that might become antigen bound to an
antibody at the antigen binding site (called an epitope) are not cleared
by macrophages and APCs and tend to insert themselves into small blood
vessels, joints, and kidneys. These immune complexes can cause an array
of symptoms (localized arthus [local vasculitis] inflammatory reactions
or urticaria [histamine reactions from degranulated mast cells]. Type
III diffuse inflammatory reactions are associated with autoimmune
diseases, for example, systemic lupus erythematosus [SLE], rheumatoid
arthritis, etc.—see Chapter 5).

2.1.4. Type IV: the cell-mediated, delayed reaction

Type IV, cell-mediated, delayed reaction takes several days to develop
and does not involve antibodies. Rather, the reaction involves the
activation of phagocytes (pathogen specific), NK cells, antigen-specific
cytotoxic T-lymphocytes, and the release of various cytokines in
response to an antigen (signal #2 in Fig. 1.5 displays this effect).
Developing over a two-to-three-day course, in Type IV hypersensitivity
reactions CD4 plus T_(H) cells recognize antigen in a complex with Class
2 MHC (see Chapter 1, page 11) APCs.

This reaction provides immune protection through either humoral (body
fluids, serum, and chemicals, e.g., interferons, interleukins—signal #2)
or through cell-mediated immunity where the protective immune function
is associated with cells. These cells include CD4 cells, NK cells, and
helper T_(H) cells that provide protection against pathogens, and
cytotoxic T_(C) cells that cause death by apoptosis (programmed cell
death [4]) without the use of cytokines. Together the reactions are most
effective in removing virus-infected cells, but also participate in
defending against fungi, protozoans, cancers, and intracellular
bacteria. Type IV hypersensitivity also plays a role in temporal
arteritis, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, symptoms of tuberculosis, celiac
disease, graft-rejection, and chronic transplant rejection.

2.2. The inflammatory cascade

OK, now back to the straight clinical stuff regarding presentations in
acute inflammation. Consistent with the definition of its name, acute
inflammation and its associated clinical manifestations usually occur
within hours to days (minutes in Type I immediate, allergic IgE
response) with ulceration occurring shortly thereafter if untreated.
Somewhat ironic in this sequence of the clinical inflammatory process is
that all of the effects up to (but not including) ulceration, are
actually part of the immune system's healing process (an added paradox
of a “best friend—worst enemy” combination!). The adaptive immune
response is using many tools, like the cellular components (T and B
cells), antibodies, chemicals (cytokines), and more in amounts not
normal (“pathophysiological”) to your body. Here, the regular
(“physiological”) activity is working diligently to resolve the
“pathological” (disease) process in your body. But those valiant efforts
are also producing abnormal byproducts like excessive cellular debris
and added chemicals called “pro-inflammatory cytokines.” Accumulation of
these byproducts is itself a basis for continuation of the acute
inflammatory pathophysiological process.

Acute inflammation is a fairly efficient immunopathological defense
mechanism of the adaptive immune system. (You'll notice how the “immuno”
prefix is beginning to show up in more and more descriptive prefixes,
e.g., “immunopathological.” This will be increasing throughout the rest
of this book with many more “immuno …” labels. But, I digress—yet
again.) This broadly defined, nonspecific, acute inflammatory,
immunopathological process produces an observable clinical response
referred to as the “inflammatory cascade.”

Fig. 2.1 (Diagram #5) is the continuum or the flow diagram [5] (started
with Fig. 1.3 in Chapter 1) that I warned you about (with more to come).
The left side of the inflammatory cascade in Fig. 2.1 represents the
biochemistry and “pharmacodynamics” (how drugs work and their effects)
most associated with acute inflammation and its medical treatments.
You'll notice how the drug therapies (corticosteroids and NSAIDs
[nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs]) produce their effects at
particular sites within the pharmacological tree, blocking chemical
pathways (phospholipids in the case of corticosteroids and NSAIDs for
the cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase pathways), the chemicals that lead
to the dilation of blood vessels (vasodilation or the first level of
acute inflammation—see Fig. 2.2) and pain (produced by chemical
prostaglandins). Also, the chemicals, histamine and heparin, and mast
cell molecule degranulation associated with the Type I allergic
hypersensitivity reaction are immunomodulated within this
pharmacological tree as well (right side). The balance of the
biochemistry and molecular biology on the right side of this
pharmacological diagram relate more to chronic inflammation and their
relevance will be describe in greater detail in Chapter 4. Also,
bidirectional neural stimuli (from innate immunity) continue its
downregulating activity which may mitigate or even reverse the
inflammatory, adaptive immune activity. But its label, “bidirectional,”
also indicates its progressive, neurogenic inflammatory stimuli
(discussed further in Chapter 4, page 87).

[ Figure 2.2  Clinical manifestations of acute inflammation—diagram
#6.Acute inflammation includes the clinical manifestations of
vasodilation (rubor), edema (tumor and dolor), infiltration (tumor and
dolor) and, if not timely controlled, ulceration (functio
laesa). Source: Louis J Catania © 2022. ]

Acute inflammation can occur anywhere, internally (e.g., acute
gastritis, hepatitis, etc.) or externally (e.g., contact dermatitis,
keratitis, etc.) producing the inflammatory cascade. The “cascade”
includes the pharmacological components producing inflammation and their
subsequent clinical manifestations. The pathophysiology and
histopathology (tissue reactions) of acute inflammation as defined in
the inflammatory cascade are being produced by the cells and mediators
of the adaptive immune response (so, believe it or not, all of Chapter 1
does have some relevance) resulting in a dynamic unfolding of clinical
events (Fig. 2.2—Diagram #6: the continuum or flow from Fig. 2.1—I think
by now you can begin to see a flow diagram of active immunity emerging
from the earliest APC (Fig. 1.3), through innate immunity (Figs. 1.4 and
1.5), then adaptive immunity, and now inflammation (Fig. 2.2). And
believe it or not, there's yet still more to come).

3. Clinical considerations in acute inflammation

The observable signs and symptoms that flow from the inflammatory
cascade (Fig. 2.2) are classic and familiar to all of us. We certainly
were not the first generation nor even the first (or second) century to
recognize or describe them. They are so classic that they were first
observed as far back as 450 BCE and then documented and named by a Greek
forefather of medicine, Celsius, in 38 AD (I'll give you the specific
names, one by one in the upcoming description. Pretty excited, I'll
bet!). The classic signs and symptoms of acute inflammation are quite
predictable with almost any degree of early inflammation. With proper
treatment approaches (described below), unless they reach the level of
ulceration, acute inflammation usually diminishes and resolves
relatively rapidly with no consequences. When unresolved, due to a lack
of timely treatment, no response to treatment or no treatment at all,
the condition can spiral into a destructive organ and/or tissue
ulcerative process with tissue changes and scarring and more so, into an
insidious and destructive chronic inflammatory stage (Chapter 4). But
let's assume we're diligent patients. We understand the implications of
acute inflammation and mostly, we just want to feel better.

3.1. Signs and symptoms

Acute inflammation is the immune system's attempt to help rather than
hurt (as I mentioned previously, a bit of a paradox in and of itself) by
reestablishing a homeostatic (stable, normal, balanced) state in the
tissue(s) or organ(s) involved. Thus, each of the classic clinical acute
inflammatory features has a physiological goal to achieve.
Notwithstanding these worthy objectives, these physiological effects
produce a disequilibrium (a “dysregulated”) subjective (pain and
discomfort) and objective (physiologic) response. So, while acute
inflammation is trying to help us, we're not all too happy with the
help.

We know from our earlier discussion in Chapter 1 (page 13) about active
immunity that we need a lot of WBCs (lymphocytes) and their accompanying
antibodies to attack and remove antigens. Well, as you recall, most of
those WBCs, particularly the neutrophils (remember, “the first
responders”?) are in the blood (inside the circulatory system's blood
vessels). Upon getting the immune signals from activated macrophages,
T_(H) cells (APCs), inflammatory mediators, cytokines, etc., the main
phalanx of cells, countless neutrophils, lymphocytes, and NK cells must
now get out of the blood and into the tissue where they are needed. This
is accomplished by a process of vasodilation (increased caliber of the
blood vessels) that opens the pores in the blood vessel walls. This
allows the WBCs to exit the blood vessels (diapedesis—described below)
and migrate to the needed area, where the antigen is attacking. So far,
so good.

Together, the dilated blood vessels produce redness (aka “rubor” from
the red blood cells [RBCs]—our first Celsius term) and the increased
blood flow creates heat (aka “calor”—our second Celsius term). Though
poorly understood, it is believed that the inflammatory mediators
associated with this adaptive immune response send signals to the brain
center (hypothalamus) that controls body temperature. The nervous system
sends chemical signals, “dysregulators” that generate the heat to the
involved tissue (or organ). Interleukin is a big player in this process
(it's called the “leukocytic pyrogen”). These signals or pyrogenic
mediators contribute to the direct calor at the inflammatory site as
well as a fever, often associated with inflammation. This is a great
illustration of how the immune mediators, especially interleukins and
interferons, act as the “wireless” (Wi-Fi, if you will) communication
system for immune responses (i.e., nervous system talking to the immune
system—see Chapter 4, page 84).

All of this also suggests, as mentioned above, that an overabundance of
these mediators and thus, their cumulative stealthy signals, could
become overly aggressive and produce an “attack” on the body rather than
beneficial, communicating signals. This could generate an antigenic
response, or more appropriately termed an “autoantigenic” (signals
coming from within the body) response (another immune paradox—seems like
they're beginning to pile up since adaptive immunity kicked in). I'll
bet you can see where I'm going with that evocative comment.
Autoimmunity—“the mother of all immune system paradoxes!” Right on and
more on the serious risk of autoimmunity in Chapter 5.

Meanwhile, back at those dilated blood vessels, protein-rich plasma is
escaping. While aiding in the tissue defense, that plasma (fluid serum)
is also producing edema or tissue swelling (aka “tumor”—third Celsius
term). There actually is a reason and some good and some bad in this
edema effect (usual, when you let nature call the shots). The plasma
fluid is loosening the tissue and allowing the WBC cellular elements to
migrate more effectively to the antigenic site (that's good) while
continually accumulating (aka “infiltration”—not so good). Certainly,
these plasma and cellular effects are beneficial, but as they
accumulate, they also are becoming increasingly more apparent physically
(e.g., pus), more uncomfortable to the patient, and more “foreign”
(remember, those WBCs don't belong in that tissue, let alone in large
quantities). This increasing loss of tissue or organ homeostasis is
generating other chemical mediators as well (e.g., prostaglandins) that
are increasing pain symptoms (aka “dolor”—and that's Celsius' last
contribution to inflammation … I think. You never know with these
Romans. He probably figured out some way to measure temperature. Naa.
That was Fahrenheit, wasn't it?).

Hopefully, all of these activities in the tissue(s) or organ
structure(s), especially the potent cellular elements like neutrophil
phagocytosis (pathogen ingestion and externally appearing clinically as
“pus”) and NK cells along with the T and B cells, are dispatching their
immunologic duties of neutralizing the antigen in a timely manner (the
mixed leukocytic reaction or MLR). The longer it takes them, however,
the more at risk adjacent, healthy tissue becomes as cellular debris and
neutrophils begin to interpret otherwise healthy (“self”) surrounding
tissue as “foreign.” This possible, idiosyncratic, paradoxical effect
can lead to that normal, otherwise healthy tissue destruction and loss,
and eventual scarring (aka “ulceration”). Along with this tissue or
organ destruction (including potential DNA disruptions), permanent loss
of tissue or organ function (aka “functio laesa”) can occur. So
ultimately, what started out as a positive, physiological, mitigating,
rectifying immune process, has become “an enemy within us.”

3.2. Treatment approaches

The variety of treatment considerations (manipulations of the
pharmacology in Fig. 2.3—Diagram #7) related to the inflammatory cascade
is extensive, but as stated numerous times up to this point, the first
treatment is always the removal of the cause (the antigen). Such removal
can range from simple hygiene; to antibiotics or antivirals for a
bacterial or viral infectious antigen respectively (external or
internal) and let's not forget, especially in this age of pandemics,
vaccines as anti-virals. Type I reactions (allergy) includes removal of
the allergen, antihistamine, decongestants, and mast cell stabilizing
drugs. In more severe reactions (including anaphylaxis), topical and
oral corticosteroids and injectable epinephrine may be required. In all
forms of acute inflammation, cold (wet or ice) compresses are enormously
valuable in reducing inflammatory edema by producing vasoconstriction
and commensurate reduction in vasodilation of associated blood vessels
(i.e., rubor with tumor or edema) that are supplying inflammatory WBCs
through the blood vessel wall (diapedesis) to the affected site.

This critically important diapedesis process is instigated by the
endothelial leukocytic adhesion molecule (ELAM on the right column of
Fig. 2.3). A combination of cytokines induces the ELAMs to stimulate
leukocytic (neutrophils in particular) adhesion to the endothelial
vessel wall. Then cellular migration associated with surface proteins
and chemokines produce blood vessel wall permeability (diapedesis) and
extravasation (cell escape from the vessel) of the neutrophils. Fig. 2.4
illustrates this dynamic process. Once outside the blood vessel, as
we've been describing, the circulating leukocytes migrate to the disease
site(s), where they are activated by various cytokines and chemokines
secreted by the macrophages and dendritic cells to help neutralize the
antigen. But, without the assistance of removal of the cause by physical
or antiinfective therapies, those inflammatory WBCs and chemical
mediators become potentially destructive to normal tissue.

Topical and systemic corticosteroids are used to mitigate signs and
symptoms in more acute inflammatory reactions (from Fig. 2.2). These
drugs produce “masking effects” (reduction of signs and symptoms) but
they are palliative rather than curative as is sometimes thought. NSAIDs
(nonsteroidal antiinflammatories such as aspirin, ibuprofen, or
naproxen) provide pain relief (as antiprostaglandins—from Fig. 2.3).
It's also important to remember that as immunosuppressive agents,
corticosteroids are reducing the defense mechanisms of the inflammatory
reaction and thus its beneficial effects (WBCs, phagocytosis, etc.)
against the invading antigen (a therapeutic paradox). When this antigen
is an infectious agent, the steroid is reducing its immune mitigation
and allowing it to survive, if not proliferate. This also increases the
potential for additional opportunistic infectious agents to attack.
Thus, corticosteroids have an attendant risk of secondary and/or
increasing infection. Need I say, astute clinical diagnosis and
management is essential in all steroid usage. This same risk will be
mentioned again in Chapter 4 when we discuss immunosuppressive drugs.

[ Figure 2.3  Treatment considerations in acute inflammation—diagram
#7.The clinical manifestations of the inflammatory cascade
(vasodilation, edema, infiltration, ulceration) are treated generically
with removal of the cause (antigen); cold compresses (for vasodilation
and edema); corticosteroids for infiltration; and aggressive treatments
for ulceration). Source: Louis J Catania © 2022. ]

[ Figure 2.4  Leukocyte (neutrophil) extravasation.Inflammatory
vasodilation (redness or rubor) opens the pores of the blood vessels to
allow WBCs (neutrophils) to “infiltrate” into the tissue (diapedesis)
and attack the invading antigen. Source: National Institute of Health,
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services.]

Injury repair and stress reduction (physical, physiological,
psychological) therapies are also valuable. Beyond these therapies,
treatment is palliative and directed to the involved site (joint,
muscle, internal organ, skin, etc.) to reduce the inflammatory process
and mitigate the pain (assuming the antigen has been removed).
Additional therapeutic measures include nutritional and vitamin
supplements, omega-3 sources, compression, stress reduction, and
exercise. We can do all sorts of additional chapters (and books) on
these “additional therapeutic” measures and their benefits which are
voluminous. But I'll have to leave that to other more knowledgeable
experts and resources on those subjects. But you really should
investigate such measures for improved health and wellness, especially
exercise where the literature is exploding on its advantages in sickness
and in health.

4. Using the adaptive immune response to help and prevent disease

We have been talking about “our friends,” the active, innate, and
adaptive immune systems being our defense against foreign, nonself
antigens and 99+% of the time doing a great job. In such approaches, we
call upon the immune system as we incite, or better still “inspire” it
to rally to a preemptive protection against antigens, mostly infectious.
The COVID-19 pandemic painfully awakened us to the critical importance
of immunology and genetics, especially as we race to find an antiviral
drug and vaccines to save humanity. In such cases, we are attempting to
modulate, manipulate, and enhance the adaptive immune system to use its
powerful cellular and humoral properties to provide a defense against
the invading antigen (specifically, the SARS-CoV-2 virus). We might
clone neutralizing antibodies (monoclonal antibodies) to bolster the
immune attack on the antigen. We might extract programmed antibodies
from previously infected patients (convalescent plasma) as preventive
therapy. We might try to trick the antigen with modified doppelgangers
(copies of itself—in this case, the infectious agent) or introduce an
altered form of another viral substance (e.g., an attenuated infectious
agent or a recombinant viral vector) to stimulate a controlled
production of antibodies to effect an immunity. And thus, we must
consider vaccines and vaccination or immunization, (see Chapter 7) a
process by which, preemptively (or thereafter) we can beneficially
“manipulate” the immune system in multiple ways.

We've gotten substantially better at all these approaches, thanks to
dedicated researchers, improved genetic technologies (next-gen
sequencing or NGS—see Chapter 3 on genetics), and certainly the help of
artificial intelligence (AI) that uses big data analytics
(immunoinformatics—see page 210) to search billions of databases for
virtually instant answers and expedited solutions. All of these
applications of the adaptive immune system to help and prevent disease
will be thoroughly addressed in Chapter 5 regarding therapeutic
considerations for autoimmune diseases, in Chapter 6 regarding
monoclonal antibodies in the treatment of cancers, and in Chapter 7
regarding immunotherapies for COVID-19. But I felt it would be
worthwhile during this basic science discussion on adaptive immunity to
accentuate its importance, regarding its value in clinical healthcare.
It's kind of a “love–hate” scenario and “rubber meets the road” analogy
regarding the benefits we enjoy from adaptive immunity and receive as
patients from the work the basic scientists provide.

5. The path to chronic inflammation

Through proper diagnosis and removal of the cause, adaptive immunity
paradoxically can remain a human biological “friend.” Such immunity's
clinical manifestation of acute inflammation, in spite of a little
discomfort, will usually result in health and wellness. But, if not
managed, controlled, and resolved within a reasonable period of time
(weeks to months at most), the adaptive immune system can advance to a
condition called “chronic inflammation” or truly, “Enemy #1.” This form
of inflammation differs from acute inflammation as we mentioned in the
beginning of this chapter, in its cellular pathology and clinical
symptoms ranging from nothing at all to those of acute inflammation and
much worse. To further confuse the issue, it should be noted that,
though poorly understood, chronic inflammation can also develop
spontaneously, that is without an apparent antigen and acute
inflammatory precursor episode.

The development of chronic inflammation could reasonably be considered
an advanced form of acute inflammation. But its pathogenesis,
histopathology, immunochemistry, and most of all, its clinical course
contradicts such a clinical evolution. Rather, chronic inflammation
provides irrefutable clinical confirmation that it is a distinct and
unique clinical entity, notwithstanding the name it shares with acute
inflammation. At the point of clinical diagnosis of chronic
inflammation, we can no longer consider the immune system “a friend.” We
are now faced with the dark side of our immune system, or “the enemy
within us.” That discussion begins with chronic inflammation (Chapter 4)
as a distinct and separate disease entity, while often evolving from its
“distant cousin,” acute inflammation. Chronic inflammation now devolves
into an array of serious abnormalities from autoimmune diseases, cancers
and beyond which we will address in Section 2, “The enemy within us.”

But first, as promised, in the Introduction to this Section 1, I want to
set the tone and provide information needed for a full understanding of
Section 2 discussions. This last chapter in Section 1 (Chapter 3) will
introduce, in rather abbreviated fashion, the basic science and concepts
of genetics, specifically immunogenetics and immunogenomics. This will
lay the groundwork for the substantial amount of genetic science that
will appear throughout Section 2. My hope is that the Chapter 3
information on genetics will provide comfort for you in its Section 2
clinical applications. I know we can get through this together, so let's
keep going.

6. Brief research summaries on the innate and adaptive immune system

(Reference citations for each research study presented below can be
found in the corresponding footnote. Also, a listing of available
scientific reference sources and databases used by the author are
included in the book's Acknowledgments.)

As described in Chapter 1 on innate immunity, research in the field of
immunology (and genetics), especially with the help of AI, is rapidly
advancing our understanding of the immune system and its clinical
effects on our bodies. Here again, research regarding adaptive immunity
will give more practical examples of the benefits to humanity being
realized through immunology research. The following are three examples
of such immunological research.

-   1. The diagnosis of acute appendicitis is challenging, especially
    due to the frequently unspecific clinical picture it presents as.
    Inflammatory blood markers and imaging methods like ultrasound are
    limited because they have to be interpreted by experts, yet still do
    not offer sufficient diagnostic certainty. A recent study presents a
    method for automatic diagnosis of appendicitis as well as the
    differentiation between complicated and uncomplicated inflammation
    using values and parameters that are routinely and unbiasedly
    obtained for each patient with suspected appendicitis. A total of
    590 patients (473 patients with histologically confirmed
    appendicitis and 117 with negative histopathological findings) were
    analyzed retrospectively with modern AI algorithms. Results revealed
    the capability to prevent two out of three patients without
    appendicitis from receiving “useless” surgery as well as one out of
    three patients with uncomplicated appendicitis. This clinical study
    and outcome has the potential to change the current therapeutic
    approach for appendicitis and it demonstrates the capability of AI
    algorithms to significantly improve inflammatory disease diagnostics
    even based on routine diagnostic parameters [6].
-   2. The inflammatory response runs through all stages of acne. It
    involves both innate and adaptive immunity. A study aimed to explore
    the candidate genes and their relative signaling pathways in
    inflammatory acne used AI data-mining analysis. Aberrant,
    differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and pathophysiological
    pathways involved in acne were identified using bioinformatic (AI)
    analysis. There were 12 DEGs identified and the pathways included
    chemokine signaling pathway, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction,
    and cell-mediated phagocytosis. Discovery of these pathways will
    serve as a basis for further understanding the pathogenesis and
    potential therapeutic targets of inflammatory acne [7].
-   
-   3. Innate and adaptive immune memory is defining features of the
    adaptive immune system, although their induction is distinctly
    different. Innate immune memory, sometimes referred to as “trained
    immunity” is a primitive form of adaptation and provides an
    increased but nonspecific response to reinfection. Adaptive immune
    memory is more advanced, with an increased magnitude of response
    mediated through epigenetic (see Chapter 3, page 62) changes, as
    well as specific mediation through gene recombination. An integrated
    model of innate and adaptive immune memory is important for a better
    understanding of host defense, and for identifying the most
    effective approaches to modulate it for the benefit of patients with
    infections and immune-mediated diseases [8].

Chapter highlights (key point and paradoxical-related information)

-   1. As innate immunity advances to adaptive immunity, “our worst
    enemy,” immunity moves from “friend to foe.”
-   2. As adaptive immunity advances, it begins to disrupt the
    homeostasis (maintenance of a stable condition) of your body and
    your overall immune system. This disruption is referred to as
    “dysregulation” of the immune system.
-   3. Failure to remove an offending antigen in a timely manner or
    malfunction of any one of four mechanisms (feedback inhibition,
    neurogenic modulation, TS cells, and genetic cloning) leads to
    adaptive immunity.
-   4. This “dysregulation” of the immune system produces the clinical
    condition of acute inflammation.
-   5. In dysregulation, there are four classic hypersensitivity
    reactions (Types I to IV) which induce the ”inflammatory cascade” of
    biochemical reactions representing acute inflammation.
-   6. Acute inflammation can be considered a “healing” process through
    vasodilation, edema, WBC infiltration all of which also produce
    negative clinical signs (fever, swelling) and symptoms (fever,
    pain). Furthermore, acute inflammation can become destructive in the
    form of ulceration.
-   7. Clinical features of the inflammatory cascade lead to
    physiological effects producing a disequilibrium and a
    “dysregulated” immune state.
-   8. Disequilibrium produces physiological stress and an
    “autoantigenic” response further disrupting tissue homeostasis.
-   9. Principal treatment of acute inflammation is removal of the
    antigenic cause with supportive and palliative (cold compresses,
    steroids, etc.) measures.
-   10. Prolonged acute inflammation can lead to the destructive process
    referred to as chronic inflammation.

References

1. Dispenza M.C. Classification of hypersensitivity reactions.  Allergy
Asthma Proc . November 2019;40(6):p470–473 4pp..

2. Allarakha S, Suyog Uttekar P. What are the four types of allergic
reactions?  Med Net . August 13, 2020.

3. Allergy and the immune system . Johns Hopkins Health; 2019.

4. Jorgensen I, Rayamajhi M, Miao E. Programmed cell death as a defense
against infection.  Nat Rev Immunol . 2017;17:151–164.

5. Catania L.J.  Primary care of the anterior segment 2nd edition
(textbook) . McGraw Hill; 1996:22–82 [Chapter 2]. Clinical
Considerations on Anterior Segment Pathology and Immunology.

6. Reismann J, Romualdi A, Kiss N, et al. Diagnosis and classification
of pediatric acute appendicitis by artificial intelligence methods: an
investigator-independent approach.  PLoS One . September 25, 2019;14(9).

7. Faria B, Vistulo de Abreu F. Cellular frustration algorithms for
anomaly detection applications.  PLoS One . July 8, 2019;14(7):e0218930.

8. Netea M.G, Schlitzer A, Placek K, Joosten L.A.B, Schultze J.L. Innate
and adaptive immune memory: an evolutionary continuum in the host's
response to pathogens.  Cell Host Microbe . January 9, 2019;25(1):13–26.

3: Genetics and genomics

Abstract

Fundamental to “the paradox of the immune system” is human genetics and
the human genome. To understand the human immune system and its
enigmatic, paradoxical role with our human biology, it is essential to
trace its evolutionary history over billions of years. The basic
characteristics of the human genome include genes, chromosomes, the
deoxyribonucleic acid helix, ribonucleic acid and the “central dogma of
molecular biology,” protein synthesis, transcription, and translation.
These are the building blocks of our current immune system that help us
understand the keys to our existence including things like the Major
Histocompatibility Complex, Human Leukocytic Antigens, the
antibody-encoding gene, base compounds, gene sequencing, and the
microbiome (“the second genome”). Understanding these elements of our
existence has allowed us to develop the sciences of immunogenetics and
immunogenomics and ultimately, lifesaving immunotherapeutics, and
genetic procedures including gene editing (e.g., CRISPR-Cas9) and gene
transfer (CAR-T cell replacement). A new world coming started a billion
years ago.

Keywords

Central dogma of molecular biology; Chromosome; DNA; Gene; Genetics;
Genome; Human Leukocytic Antigen (HLA); Major Histocompatibility Complex
(MHC); Microbiome; Protein synthesis; RNA; Transcription; Translation

… the specific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a copying
mechanism for genetic material.

Watson and Crick, The Double Helix, Nobel Prize 1962.

1. Introduction

Selecting an appropriate placement for this chapter on genetics and
genomics related to immunology (immunogenetics and immunogenomics)
presented a dilemma relative to the nature of this book. Section 1 is
dedicated to the “friendly immune system.” It sets the tone and content
necessary to appreciate the adaptive immune system as will be presented
in Section 2, “The enemy within us.” But genetic relationships to the
immune system play a significant role in both positive (“our friend”)
and negative (“our enemy”) aspects of immunology. We've already
introduced a number of distinctly positive values of genetics to the
immune system (Major Histocompatibility Complex [MHC] genes, CD
receptors, antibody-encoding genes, and so on) in Chapters 1 and 2,
where more than 20 specific genetic and genomic references have already
been made. But coming up here in Chapter 3 and then in all of Section 2,
you'll learn more about genetic and genomic affects and the influences
they create on immunity relating to chronic inflammation, autoimmune
diseases, cancers, and infectious diseases.

Notwithstanding some rather extensive relationships between genetics and
the “not so great” effects of the immune system to be discussed in
Section 2, I am positioning this chapter on genetics and genomics here
in Section 1 for two reasons. First, the nature of human genetics is the
basis for the very essence of human life, its form and function, and
indeed, its immune defense system. Thus, genetics can be considered
perhaps the most distinct and essential feature of our immune system in
its positive and “friendly” form. Second, given the frequent, recurring
inclusion of genetics in Section 2 discussions, rather than having to
describe its science piecemeal with each of its immunologic
relationships, let's cover all the basics here and then in Section 2,
I'll refer you back to this Chapter (3) when necessary (fairly
frequently). I hope this makes some sense to you and that it proves to
be a comfortable and efficient approach for understanding this, yet
again, complex subject.

2. Basic science of genetics

Nearly three-quarters of our immune system is influenced by genes [1].
Immunogenetics is the branch of science that explores the relationship
between the immune system and genetics. Our understanding of how the
human immune system functions in health and disease is broadening with
the intersection of immunogenetics and the emergence of immunogenomics,
the study of the total human genome, or the complete set of genetic
instructions. Together, immunogenetics and immunogenomics are creating a
body of knowledge that is shaping our current and future healthcare. A
review of the fundamentals of genetics should give you a good basis for
understanding immunogenetics and immunogenomics.

2.1. Structures and functions [2]

A gene is the fundamental physical and functional unit of heredity made
up of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid, the carrier of the genetic code, or
genetic information). It is estimated that humans have between 20,000
and 25,000 genes. Every person has two copies of each gene (called
diploid pairs), one inherited from each parent. Most genes are the same
in all people, but a small number of genes (less than 1% of the total)
are slightly different between people. Alleles are forms of the same
gene with slight differences in their sequence of DNA base compounds.
These small differences contribute to each person's unique physical
features (their phenotype).

The human body is composed of trillions of cells (Here we go again with
“trillions” of things. Almost sounds like a government budget, or worse,
a government deficit). In the nucleus of each cell, the DNA molecule is
packaged into thread-like structures (helixes) called chromosomes
(Fig. 3.1). Virtually every single cell in the body contains a complete
copy of the approximately three billion DNA base compounds or
nucleotides (exomes) usually designated as letters (adenine [As],
thymine [Ts], guanine [Gs], and cytosine [Cs]). In normal genes, these
compounds are paired with adenine bound to thymine and guanine bound to
cytosine. Collectively, these nucleotide pairs (the exome) make up the
total genes of the human genome or the genetic code (By the way, the
total genes and proteins that make up the immune system are called the
immunome [3]—need I suggest you remember that?).

Corresponding to the double-stranded DNA (helix) molecule is the
single-stranded ribonucleic acid (RNA) molecule (much shorter than the
DNA strands) (Fig. 3.2). RNA's function is to act as a messenger,
carrying instructions (code) from DNA for controlling the protein
synthesis (the “central dogma of molecular biology”—more below). RNA
also has four base compounds, three similar to DNA (As, Cs, and Gs) and
the fourth, thymine (Ts), replaced by uracil (U). In DNA translation
(discussed below), uracil replaces thymine to bind with adenine. Stay
with me on this. We're getting to some important stuff.

[ Figure 3.1  Chromosome.In the nucleus of each cell, the DNA molecule
is packaged into thread-like structures called chromosomes. Within each
DNA helix are “sequences” (“genetic code”) made up of four nitrogen base
compounds, paired as “base pairs” (adenine paired with thymine and
guanine paired with cytosine). Together, a base pair along with a sugar
and phosphate molecule is called a nucleotide. Source: National
Institute of Health, U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services.]

At the ends of each chromosome are stretches of DNA called telomeres
(Fig. 3.1). These "tips" of the chromosome are tightly packed chains of
nucleotides that degrade slowly over the years resulting in telomere
shrinkage. Eventually, their DNA can no longer divide and they become
inactive or "senescent" and die. This process is believed to be the
etiology of aging. It also has been associated with cancer and a higher
risk of death. Also, each chromosome has a constriction point called the
centromere that divides the chromosome into two sections, or “arms.” The
location of the centromere on each chromosome gives the chromosome its
characteristic shape and is used to help describe the location of
specific genes. The overall number and shape of all your chromosomes are
called your karyotype (Fig. 3.3). Your genotype is the genetic
information you carry for a trait, and your phenotype is how that trait
is physically manifested on and in your body. Does that sum up all of
genetics? Not quite!

[ Figure 3.2  DNA and RNA structure.DNA (Deoxyribonucleic acid) is a
double-stranded molecules (double helix) with four nucleotides (Adenine
(A) pairs with Thymine (T). RNA (ribonucleic acid) is a much shorter,
the single-stranded molecule with Uracil (U) replacing thymine. Source:
National Institute of Health, U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services.]

Genetics is defined as a branch of biology (molecular biology) concerned
with the study of genes, genetic variations, and heredity in organisms
[4]. Genes express (through alleles) specific traits called the
phenotype that may be physical (e.g., hair, eye color, skin color,
etc.), while others may carry the risk of certain diseases and disorders
that may be passed on from parents to offspring. Thus, genetics is the
study of heredity, or how the characteristics of living organisms are
transmitted from one generation to the next via DNA or your genetic
code. Along with immunology, it is this bioscience that has the highest
potential of influencing virtually every category of health, wellness,
and prevention.

There are a number of elements that make up what is referred to as the
molecular biology of genetics or molecular genetics. They include the
cell, its nucleus, chromosomes within the nucleus, the DNA strands
within the chromosomes, and the base compounds of the genes within the
chromosomes (Fig. 3.4). A summary listing of the structures and
functions of each part of the genome is as follows:

[ Figure 3.3  Human karyotype.The overall number and shape of all your
chromosomes are called a karyotype. Source: National Institute of
Health, U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services.]

1.  • The human cell within which is its nucleus;

2.  • Within the cell nucleus reside chromosomes (23 diploid pairs in
    somatic [body] cells or 23 single haploid strands in embryonic or
    germ cells);

3.  • Within each chromosomal strand is a double-stranded spiral (helix)
    of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), thanks to James Watson and Francis
    Crick for this seminal 1962 Nobel prize winning discovery;

4.  • Within each DNA helix are “sequences” (“genetic code”) that
    represent the order of the four nitrogen base compounds (nucleic
    acids), paired as “base pairs” (adenine paired with thymine and
    guanine paired with cytosine);

5.  • Together, a base pair along with a bonding sugar and phosphate
    molecule is called a nucleotide (an exon and collectively, an
    exome);

6.  • These nucleotides are held together by hydrogen bonds and arranged
    in two long strands that form the double-stranded spiral mentioned
    above, called the DNA double helix;

7.  

8.  [ Figure 3.4  Cellular biology of the human genome.There are a
    number of elements that make up what is referred to as the human
    genome including the cellular biology of genetics which includes the
    cell, its nucleus, chromosomes within the nucleus, the DNA strands
    within the chromosomes, and the base compounds of the genes within
    the chromosomes. Source: National Institute of Health, U.S. Dept. of
    Health and Human Services.]

9.  • The mapping of these double helixes in the cell of a living
    organism is called its “karyotype” (see Fig. 3.3);

10. • Defined groups (from a few hundred to a few million) of these
    base-compound paired sequences on a DNA double helix are called
    genes (and once again for emphasis, humans have between 20,000 and
    25,000 genes);

11. • Pairs or series of inherited genes on a chromosome that determine
    hereditary characteristics (e.g., hair color, eye color, height,
    etc.) are called alleles;

12. • The specific makeup and positioning (loci) of these alleles on a
    chromosome are called a genotype;

13. • A pair of alleles in the same gene is either autosomal dominant or
    recessive;

14. • Homozygous means that both copies of a gene or loci match while
    heterozygous means that the copies do not match;

15. 

16. • Two dominant alleles (AA) or two recessive alleles (aa) are
    homozygous. One dominant allele and one recessive allele (Aa) is
    heterozygous;

17. • An autosomal dominant allele will always be preferentially
    expressed (hereditarily) over a recessive allele;

18. • The visible or observable expression of the results of the
    genotype, combined with environmental influences (any bodily
    adjustment to the environment over time), is called the phenotype.

2.2. The central dogma of molecular biology (a very big deal!) [5]

Besides heredity dictating the phenotype of the human organism, the
critical function of the genetic process and thus, the genes are the
production of amino acids. These are the building blocks of the large,
complex protein molecules that play critical roles in the structure,
function, and regulation of the body's tissues and organs. A gene
traditionally refers to the unit of DNA that carries the instructions
for making a specific protein or sets of proteins, a process called
protein synthesis. Each of the estimated 20,000 to 25,000 human genes in
the human genome codes for an average of three proteins.

Located on 23 pairs of chromosomes in the nucleus of a human cell, the
genes direct production of proteins with the assistance of enzymes
(protease) and messenger molecules (messenger ribonucleic acid or mRNA).
Fig. 3.5 presents a schematic diagram of protein synthesis and Fig. 3.6
illustrates the cellular process of transcription and translation (now,
here comes the “dogma”).

During transcription, information stored in a DNA's gene sequence (its
genetic code) is copied to a smaller, single-stranded ribonucleic acid
molecule called mRNA (messenger RNA). The base compounds in the copied
DNA, adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and thymine (T), form
specific pairs with the bases in the mRNA, except adenine (A) in the DNA
pairs with uracil (U) in the mRNA (shown is a sequence of three bases
called a codon in the mRNA). Then, the mRNA molecule transfers the
information (the DNA “code message”) from the nucleus into the cell
cytoplasm.

In the next step, translation, mRNA interacts with a specialized complex
in the cytoplasm called a ribosome that reads the transcribed DNA code
and translates the gene sequence into genetically programmed polypeptide
chains that bind together to form amino acids. Finally, in a process
called protein synthesis, the mRNA attaches to a ribosome while another
type of RNA called transfer RNA (tRNA) assembles amino acid codons that
match the mRNA codon sequences and these amino acids bind together in
chains to form functional body proteins (tissues, organs, cells, enzymes
… you name it). It's important to understand that this process will
construct tissue, cells, etc. from normal, as well as abnormal (mutated)
genetic code.

[ Figure 3.5  Transcription and translation.This illustration describes
the cellular process of transcription and translation. During
transcription, information stored in a DNA's gene sequence (its genetic
code) and copied to a smaller, single stranded ribonucleic acid molecule
called mRNA (messenger RNA). Source: Louis J Catania © 2022.]

This stepped process (Figs. 3.5 and 3.6) in which hereditary information
in DNA is used to make proteins is called the “central dogma of
molecular biology” or the science of “transcriptomics.” This is what the
bioscience of our body is all about. Beyond transcriptomics, which
defines the expression of the genes' RNA proteins (the proteome [6]),
“proteomics” studies their biochemistry, functions, and interactions
within the body. If a cell's DNA is mutated, an abnormal protein will be
produced which disrupts the body's usual processes and leads to diseases
such as autoimmune diseases and cancers (discussed in Section 2).
Needless to say, this genetic process, proteolysis, and protein
synthesis will be revisited numerous times in Section 2 in both positive
and negative immunogenetic applications.

As mentioned above, other than genetics' phenotype heredity functions,
this “central dogma of molecular biology” is the single most important
function of our genome. It is in fact, the essence of our being. So,
allow me to summarize the steps in the process that builds our body day
in and day out, mostly for the better, but sometimes (with genetic
mutations), for the worse:

1.  • Transcription: information stored in a DNA's gene sequence (its
    genetic code) is copied to a smaller, single stranded ribonucleic
    acid molecule called mRNA (messenger RNA);

2.  

3.  [ Figure 3.6  Central dogma of molecular biology.Transcription and
    translation; the top-left part of the drawing shows transcription
    occurring in the nucleus of a cell: a piece of DNA that codes for a
    specific gene is copied into mRNA; bases in the copied DNA, adenine
    (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and thymine (T), form specific pairs
    with the bases in the mRNA, except adenine (A) in the DNA pairs with
    uracil (U) in the mRNA (also shown is a sequence of three bases
    called a codon in the mRNA); the mRNA then carries the genetic
    information from the DNA to the cytoplasm. The right part of the
    drawing shows translation occurring in the cytoplasm of a cell: the
    mRNA attaches to and passes through the ribosome; tRNA carries an
    amino acid to the ribosome, where it binds to a matching codon
    sequence in the mRNA; the amino acid joins with the other amino
    acids to form a growing protein chain; the completed protein is then
    released from the ribosome. Source: National Institute of Health,
    U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services.]

4.  • These mRNA molecules transfer the information (the DNA “code
    message”) from the nucleus into the cell cytoplasm;

5.  • Translation: mRNA interacts with a specialized complex in the
    cytoplasm called a ribosome that reads the transcribed DNA code and
    translates the gene sequence into genetically programmed polypeptide
    chains that bind together to form amino acids; and

6.  

7.  • Finally: In a process called protein synthesis, the mRNA attaches
    to a ribosome while, another type of RNA called transfer RNA (tRNA)
    assembles amino acid codons that correspond to the mRNA codon
    sequences and they join together to form functional body proteins.

It's called “the central dogma of molecular biology,” but I like to
think of it as “the bouncing ball of life.” Get it? “Follow the bouncing
ball?” … Never mind.

3. Immunogenetics

In our discussion in Chapter 1 about “self” versus “nonself,” the
cardinal definition of immunology, we described T and B lymphocytes in
some depth. The keys to their immunologic functions centered on their
surface receptors including Human Leukocytic Antigen (HLA), CD4 and CD8
surface proteins, and specialized “toll-like receptor” proteins or TLRs
(remember “the sentry protein” from Chapter 1?). All of these protein
receptors are genetically produced and encoded (programmed) from the
Major Histocompatibility Complex MHC (Class 1 and 2) genes. These
surface receptors are singularly responsible for the T and B cells'
functions of distinguishing self and nonself. The MHC genes are referred
to as “the key to self-recognition” and are believed to have evolved
(over 500 million years) along with our survival function and our need
to reproduce.

MHC genes function similarly within a species (humans), but within the
species, there are unique differences between each human being's MHCs
such that one human being's MHC can cause rejection of another human's
tissue or cells, a challenge in transplantation medicine (page 168).
That challenge led to the discovery of the “isoantigens” or HLA genes
(mentioned above) that differ within the same species. The 1980 Nobel
Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded to a French researcher, Jean
Dausset for this monumental discovery of MHC and HLA's influences on the
origins of our immune system. There will be more about these genes later
in our immunogenetic discussion regarding chronic inflammation,
autoimmune diseases, and cancer.

4. Immunogenomics

Genomics is a more recently popularized term originating in about 1970
that describes the study of all of a person's genes (their genome),
including interactions of those genes with each other and with the
person's environment. A genome is an organism's complete set of DNA, the
chemical compounds that contain the genetic instructions to develop and
direct the activities of every organism [7]. This science deals with the
immense volume of clinical material in the human genome through cellular
and molecular biology. It is advancing genetic therapies in the study of
the human immune system (immunogenomics) and the treatments, cures, and
prevention of disease.

Determining the order of DNA proteins (nucleotides) in an individual's
genetic code, called DNA sequencing [8], has advanced genetics both for
research and clinically. Two methods, whole-exome sequencing and
whole-genome sequencing are now being used extensively in health care
and research to identify genetic variations [9]. (A compelling example
of the value of this science is its use in rapidly identifying
coronavirus variants during the pandemic.) These approaches are known as
next-generation sequencing (next-gen sequencing or NGS). The original
sequencing technology (the Sanger method) would take months and even
years to sequence viral genomes and all of a person's DNA.
Next-generation sequencing has sped up the process (taking only days to
weeks to sequence a human genome) while dramatically reducing the cost.

In the past decade, there has been a phenomenal change in the efficiency
of DNA sequencing. Using traditional methods (Sanger sequencing), the
human genome project (HGP) took 20 years and cost $3 billion. Now,
next-generation sequencing (NGS—also called massively parallel
sequencing) is a high-throughput sequencing using artificial
intelligence (AI) big data analytics. This is the method now used to
determine a portion of the nucleotide sequence of an individual's
genome. It exponentially increases the rate of biological data being
generated. From 1990 to the completion of the Genome Project in 2003,
DNA-sequencing increased from 1000 base pairs per day to more than 1000
base pairs per second. Whereas the first human genome sequencing (Sanger
method) was a $3 billion-dollar project requiring 2decades to complete,
as mentioned above, NGS and big data analytics can now sequence a human
genome in 24 hours for under $500 [10]. Now that's progress!

5. Genetics and genomics by the numbers

The description of the genetic components and processes, while
challenging, is only part of the genetics and genomics story. The more
overwhelming feature of these sciences lies in the astronomical numbers
their components represent. Those numbers include ∼37.2 trillion
(∼37.2×10¹⁶) cells in the human body; with ∼3 billion (3.0×10¹²)
chromosomes within the nuclei of the cells; with four base compound
sequences within the DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) helixes constituting
the 20,000 to 25,000 genes. The number of possible combinations within
these sequences (“genetic codes”) of base compounds is astronomical. And
yet, it is among these prodigious numbers of gene sequences that
congenital (hereditary) and acquired mutations occur [11]. Fortunately,
only an infinitesimal amount of them (less than 60 per gene) override
“apoptosis” (normal cell's ability to selfdestruct when something goes
wrong) to produce genetic disorders or disease [12].

These mutations (structural changes resulting in a genetic variant) are
the underlying cause of all abnormalities in human beings. Using the
standard advanced algebra factorial formula (you won't be tested on
this!), nCr=n!/r!∗ (n—r)!, for possible combinations, where “n”
represents the total number of items (in this case, the number of genes
or 25,000), and “r” represents the number of items being chosen at a
time (four base compounds), the number of possible mutations in the
human genome, spread among 37.2 trillion cells, is 2.5×10²⁰ (that's 21
zeros!) [13] plus or minus a couple of million. Locating and identifying
those mutations in somatic cells and their clinical manifestations is
rather challenging to say the least. AI and the Human Genome Study
(below) is helping to answer that challenge. (Remember the magnitude of
these genetic variants when we talk about cancer mutations in Chapter 6.
It will highlight the concept of “cancering” that we'll be discussing.)

6. The Human Genome Project [14]

As we described previously, the human genome is a complete set of
nucleic acid sequences for humans, encoded as DNA within the 23
chromosome pairs in cell nuclei. The HGP was one of the greatest feats
of scientific exploration in history. Beginning on October 1, 1990 and
completed in April 2003, the HGP gave us the ability, for the first
time, to read nature's complete genetic blueprint for building a human
being. Since the completion of the HGP in 2003 and the continuing
advances in AI, the scientific community now has the tools (e.g., NGS)
to locate and identify genetic mutations in timeframes of minutes,
hours, and days, versus the original “non-AI processes” of weeks,
months, and years, if at all. This capability was the singularly
responsible technology that allowed researchers to develop a COVID-19
vaccine in less than a year (vs. the multiple years and decades needed
in the past) and then rapidly identify viral variants as they developed.

This astronomical advance in genetics has changed the current face of
immunology and health care. It provides a future for continuing,
expanding diagnostic capabilities (locating and identifying mutations),
and treatment options (engineering and manipulating gene mutations
[CRISPR-Cas9, CAR-T, etc.] to reduce their negative effects, to be
discussed in Section 2). Finally, the HGP has introduced a new level of
real personalized, “precision medicine” and prevention by enabling the
correction of gene abnormalities in many cases before they produce their
negative effects.

7. Precision (personalized) medicine and prevention [15]

The concept of precision medicine (aka personalized medicine) has become
a significant part of human genetics. While it is indirectly related to
immunology, its potential value in health care is enormous with profound
applications and impact on the future of care including the diagnosis,
treatment, and potential cure and prevention of all the immunological
diseases.

It is a concept that uses genetics as its foundation. According to the
CDC's (Center for Disease Control) “Precision Medicine Initiative,” this
relatively new term takes into account individual variability in genes,
environment, and lifestyle for each person. It allows doctors and
researchers to predict more accurately which treatment and prevention
strategies for a particular disease works in which groups of people
versus the “one-size-fits-all approach.” Its goal is to find unique
disease risks and treatments that work best for patients. It includes

1.  • the use of family history, screening for diseases before you get
    sick;
2.  • tailoring prevention;
3.  • tailoring treatments;
4.  • looking at the patient's DNA.

7.1. “All of Us”

As part of Precision Medicine, an initiative by the National Institute
of Health (NIH) entitled “All of Us” [16] will track history and
physical findings, genetics, behavioral, and environmental factors of
one million Americans for several years to assess health factors;
develop healthcare solutions that make the best decisions to prevent or
treat disease; predict epidemics; and improve the quality of life. This
concept combines medicine, biology, genetics, statistics, and AI
computing to create large-scale biobanks of complete genome-sequenced
and phenotype information from hundreds of thousands of people.

Researchers are already taking the first steps toward developing
personalized treatments for diseases. They are applying AI and machine
learning to multiple data sources, including genetic data, electronic
health records, sensor data, environmental, and lifestyle data.
Meanwhile, sustained collaboration across disciplines and institutions
in this unique precision medicine effort is proving to be the most
promising research in the healthcare field. Large corporations,
universities, and government-funded research collectives are developing
precision treatments for complex diseases including autoimmune diseases
and cancers. In the coming years, precision medicine will be part of
routine health care.

8. XCI (lyonization)

This section on genetics brings us back to the embryology discussion we
started in Chapter 1 regarding X chromosome inactivation (XCI) or
“lyonization” to “equalize” the influence of the X chromosome between
males and females (a quick one paragraph refresher on page 5 might be
worthwhile). XCI only happens in females and affects almost all of the
900 to 1400 genes on the X chromosome. Cells can express X chromosome
genes differently (and randomly) from each other. This is called
cellular mosaicism and it gives females more diversity than males
(remember, after XCI, the female has more X chromosomes than the male),
meaning that females have more genetic options during development and
thus, more ways to prevent disease [17].

Many genes can undergo changes, called mutations, which, in some cases,
can make a person more likely to get certain diseases. Diseases caused
by mutations in genes on the X chromosome are called X-linked diseases,
that is, genetic diseases in which the disease-causing gene exists on
the X chromosome. Males do not experience XCI because they only have one
X chromosome. So, if males have a disease-causing gene on their X
chromosome, it will be active and more likely to cause disease.
Conversely, XCI helps protect females from X-linked diseases but, given
the combinations and permutations created by 900–1400 X chromosome
genes, cellular mosaicism does not exclude their possibility, though
rare (e.g., Rett disease, Turner syndrome).

Assume a woman has a healthy copy of a gene on one of her X chromosomes
and a mutant copy of the same gene on her other X chromosome. If the X
chromosome with the mutant copy is turned off due to XCI “silencing,”
the X chromosome with the healthy copy will stay active and express
normal gene traits. If a female inherits a gene responsible for an
X-linked disease and has one copy that's abnormal and one copy that's
normal, the abnormal gene is almost always the one that's turned off.
The normal gene, for reasons yet unknown, almost always is allowed to
stay on, thus providing greater protection against certain diseases in
the female. In males, of course, X-linked diseases (e.g., hemophilia,
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, etc.) manifest because they only have one X
chromosome, and so those mutated genes have to show up. So, in the
X-linked diseases, the XCI seems to protect the female [18]. That,
however, is not the case for females regarding autoimmune diseases and
cancers (i.e., more X chromosomes mean more mutations) as we will
explain in Chapters 5 and 6.

Yet another compelling factor beyond the female sex hormones and X
chromosome genes predisposing females to autoimmune disease is the
microbiome. This fascinating entity is included in this chapter on
genetics and genomics because of its functions as “the second genome”
with its own subset of immune reactive cells. Let's introduce the
microbiome here to establish your understanding of its intricate genetic
and immunologic interconnections. But we'll postpone the discussion of
its relationship to autoimmune disease until the microbiome section
later in Chapter 6.

9. The “microbiome”

Just as I debated (with myself) at the beginning of this chapter about
where I should position it in the book, I have had the same uncertainty
about where I should place the subject of “the microbiome” because of
its diversity. I'm putting it here, along with the immunogenomic
discussion, because the microbiome is sometimes referred to as “the
second genome of the human body.” Now let's see if we can make some
sense of that scientific idiom.

We'll start with the interesting and probably little-known fact that
there are more bacteria in our body (greater than 30 trillion) than
there are human cells with an estimate of approximately 57% bacteria
(actually a mixture of microbes) to 43% human cells. In other words,
we're more microbe than we are human! Surprising? It was to me when I
first learned this arcane fact. But this interesting piece of molecular
(and micro) biology has resulted in giving this enormous array of
microbiota (microorganisms found in a particular habitat, in this case,
our body) the pseudonym, “the second genome of the human body.”

The unique difference in the human versus the microbial genome is their
evolutionary development. Whereas the DNA of the human genome is very
stable allowing for predictable heredity with only slight mutations over
time (sometimes over millions of years), the microbial genome (“the
second genome”) changes far more frequently. As a matter of fact, the
only time it is predictable is at birth. That is when the newborn will
inherit some microbes from mother. This is a critical process that
allows the baby to begin to deal with pathogens outside of the womb. The
transfer of microbes to the newborn happens during vaginal births when
the baby is exposed to mother's gut and vaginal microbes during
delivery. This triggers the baby's immune system, allowing for early
protection and more so, better ability to absorb nutrients from mother's
breast milk. The process does not occur in Caesarean section births and
is one theory as to weaker immune systems in babies from Caesarean
section.

All human body surfaces and all cavities that communicate with the
exterior are inhabited by complex, individualized, and variable
ecosystems of microorganisms (bacteria, viruses, protozoa, fungi, and
even primitive archaea) whose composition is influenced by host
genetics. Everything in this world is covered by microbes, so obviously
we are constantly inhaling and ingesting microbes and creating our own
gut-microbiota. And so, the theory is that the constant 24/7 exposure of
gut microbes to immune cells, from birth on, creates a chronic (albeit
subclinical most of the time) inflammatory condition in our
gastrointestinal (GI or gut) system from oral (e.g., periodontitis) to
colorectal (e.g., inflammatory bowel) syndromes. This chronic state
produces a “symbiosis,” in fact, a “biological synergy” between immune
cells and the microbes [19].

This biological synergy includes fighting off invading microorganisms
like pathogens, thanks to the antibody-encoding gene of our human genome
(from Chapter 1, the discovery that won Susumu Tonegawa the 1987 Nobel
Prize). Our immune system has an almost infinite array of antibodies to
achieve this goal. But, because of the enormity of the task including
digestion, nutrition, manufacturing vitamins, converting nutrients to
energy and proteins, controlling obesity, even managing anxiety, and
mood (using hormones and neurotransmitters to the brain), we enlist help
from “the second genome,” the “normal flora” microbes or, “the
microbiome.” No doubt, imbalance of this powerful microbiome can produce
serious health consequences, while proper balance (diet, exercise,
weight control, etc.) can be a major factor in health and wellness.

The microbiome also involves yet another specialized subset of the
T cells and a rather powerful one at that. Discussed previously in
Chapter 1, it is the T regulatory cell (or T_(reg), also referred to as
the T suppressor or T_(S) cell). One of its functions is to suppress the
immune system when it becomes too overactive and dysregulates. It has
been shown that bacteria from the microbiome trigger T_(reg) cells (and
other killer immune cells like natural killer cells [NKs] and T
cytotoxic [T_(C)] cells). Take a quick look at Fig. 1.6 showing how
these Immune cells proliferate during innate immunity. You can see that
this function becomes a mitigating force against inflammation,
autoimmune disease, even cancers as it modulates the immune system (more
in this microbiome–disease association in their subsequent, respective
chapters).

This microbiome–disease association presents an interesting theory about
human's inherent desire and continuing effort to “clean” everything
(antiseptics, antimicrobials, organic foods, etc.), sometimes called the
“hygiene hypothesis.” This human trait may be compromising our
microbiome. (Could this be a cause of increasing autoimmune diseases and
some cancers?) Microbes ain't going away, so we really should start
thinking about how we can better share the planet with them. The answers
will lie in supporting the science and immunology of the microbiome,
effective public health initiatives, and a better understanding of
how-best to harness the microbiome's potential benefits. Studies have
demonstrated that probiotics that help balance the microbiome may help
improve the immune system. The results, however, of many probiotic
clinical trials are still equivocal, especially in treatment of cancers
[20].

Regarding cancers and the microbiome, distinct aspects of the microbiota
have been reported to have either pro- or antitumor effects. The
functional role of the microbiota in regulating systemic immune
responses has led to investigations into the impact on cancer
immunotherapies, particularly with agents targeting the immunologic
checkpoints PD-1 and CTLA-4 (more in Chapter 6). Clinical trials
pursuing microbiome-based therapeutic interventions are being conducted
with the hope of expanding immunotherapy efficacy. A better
understanding of the role of the microbiota on tumor development could
lead to the early identification of individuals with high risk for
developing cancer. Modulating the microbiome in these individuals could
also have implications in cancer prevention [21].

Now, let's continue our discussion about the female bias for autoimmune
diseases that we started in Chapter 1 with the XCI discussion, revisited
it in this chapter already and now again, this time looking at its role
with the microbiome. Microbiome aberrations have been observed in the
vast majority of immune-mediated diseases. The gut microbiota plays a
critical role in maturation and modulation of innate (mentioned above)
and adaptive immunity [22]. Both the gut immune system and human
microbiota exhibit sexual dimorphism, that is where immune tissues in
the gut of the male show greater innate and adaptive immunity than that
of the female. The aggregate science-based data definitively demonstrate
that sex and androgens regulate the composition and function of the
microbiome as a direct instigator and a definitive sex bias toward
females for autoimmune disease [23].

MicroRNA (miRNA) is a noncoding RNA gene abundant on the female X
chromosome and essential in gene expression (more on microRNA in
Chapters 5 and 6). The X chromosome contains 10% of all miRNAs detected
in the human genome [24]. This gene is also endogenous in the gut
intestine and exogenous from diets. It is believed to play an
influential role in microbial colonization and intestinal immunity by
modulating intestinal immune responses and gut microbiota. Fecal miRNAs
are potential biomarkers for intestinal diseases, such as colorectal
cancer and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The relationship between
microRNAs, gut intestinal microbiota, and host immunity is decisive for
the homeostasis or dysbiosis (an imbalance between the types of
organism) of the gastrointestinal environment. The growing belief is
that aberrant expression of these microRNAs leads to immunological
abnormality and autoimmune diseases [25].

I do hope you were able to follow this fascinating and compelling aspect
of XCI, immunogenomics, and the microbiome. It's new and evolving
science will definitely help us better understand the paradox of
autoimmunity.

10. Epigenetics [26]

Chemical compounds added to a single gene can regulate the gene’s
activity. Such modifications are known as epigenetic changes [27]. The
epigenome comprises all chemical compounds and molecules that have been
added to the entirety of one's DNA (genome) to regulate the activity
(expression) of all the genes within the genome. The chemical compounds
of the epigenome are not part of the DNA sequence. They exist on or
attached to DNA (“epi-” means above in Greek). Epigenetic modifications
remain as cells divide and sometimes, they can be inherited through
generations. Patterns of epigenetic modification vary among individuals,
in different tissues within an individual, and even in different cells
[28].

Because errors in the epigenetic process, such as modifying the wrong
gene or failing to add a compound to a gene, can lead to abnormal gene
activity or inactivity. This can cause genetic disorders. Conditions,
including cancers, metabolic diseases, and degenerative disorder have
all been found to be related to epigenetic errors. Again, these “errors”
will be addressed in Section 2 in the continuing discussion of
immunogenetics and immunogenomics.

11. Cytogenetics

Cytogenetics involves the examination of chromosomes to identify
structural abnormalities. It's hard to wrap one's head around such
testing methodology when we consider the numbers presented in the
discussion above. Think about the multiples of “20,000 and 25,000 genes”
in “trillions of cells” in the human body with “3 billion DNA base
pairs” in each cell. Exponentially that sum would be 7.5×10²⁵ (if my
math is correct—not likely beyond 20 zeros). And that would be the
genome for one human being. Finding an abnormality (mutation or variant)
in that genome is what “big data analytics” (mentioned above and
discussed further, below) is all about.

Progress in genetic testing was stalled by the complexity and enormity
of the data that needed to be evaluated. Instead, the extensive datasets
(e.g., 7.5×10²⁵) in cytogenetics provide training for AI deep learning
(convolutional neural networks or CNNs) algorithms resulting in
dramatically faster (than human) and more accurate analysis [29]. With
such advances in AI and machine learning applications, researchers are
now able to interpret data better and faster, and act on genomic data
through genome sequencing (as exemplified in the variant viral
detections with COVID-19 and vaccine development). Because AI systems
can do it faster, cheaper, and more accurately, they gain perspective on
the particular genetic blueprint that orchestrates all activities of
that organism. These insights are helping health professionals make
better decisions about care (e.g., precision medicine [30]), what an
organism might be susceptible to in the future, what mutations might
cause different diseases, and how to prepare for the changes [31]. This
is an extraordinary advancement in precision medicine and more so,
preventive medicine, the holy grail of healthcare.

12. Big data analytics in genetics and genomics [32]

“Big data” is an evolving term that describes a large volume of
structured (databases), semistructured (structured data without fixed
limits), and unstructured (e-mail messages, word processing documents,
videos, photos, audio files, written notes) and clinical observations
(called heuristics) data that have the potential to be mined for
valuable information. For any data to be useful, it must be analyzed,
interpreted, and then addressed. AI algorithms are capable of analyzing
enormous amounts of data in almost instantaneous speeds whose volume or
complexity would previously have made analyzing them unimaginable. Big
data analytics' use in genetics and genomics may arguably be AI's most
profound contribution to immunology and the future of healthcare.

A person's genes are what “predispose” them to dysregulation of the
immune system, which in turn yields chronic inflammation and, in effect,
creates the pathological damage to cells, tissues, and organ systems
synonymous with all diseases (another “follow the bouncing ball” effect.
Sorry about that.). As we discussed, the environmental factors (e.g.,
smoking, pollution) along with the inherited alleles that an individual
possesses for a specific gene (the genotype) combine to produce the
“phenotype trigger” and the clinical manifestations of the disease
state.

This recipe for disease is also responsible for immune and autoimmune
diseases, for congenital and acquired genetic disorders, for cancers,
and in fact, for just about all the conditions being discussed in this
book. Thus, throughout our discussions of specific disease entities, you
will recognize common denominators in their diagnosis and treatments (as
will be mentioned in the discussion on “nonspecific” drug therapies in
autoimmune disease) [33]. What will change for each disease are the
clinical manifestations (phenotypes) of the individual disease
categories based on cellular, tissue, and organ system(s) involved [34].

13. Brief research summaries on genetics and genomics

(Reference citations for each research study presented below are
provided at the end of each study. Also, a listing of available
scientific reference sources and databases used by the author are
included in the book's Acknowledgments).

-   1. Advancement and progress in genetic and genomic research has
    created breakthroughs and new capabilities in medicine and
    immunology never imagined just five to 10 years ago. It has evolved
    from seeking to understand the fundamentals of the human genetic
    code to examining the ways in which the code varies among people and
    then utilizing that knowledge to introduce interventions targeting
    the underlying causes of disease. Since the completion of the first
    full mapping of the human genome in 2003, attention has graduated
    from searching for genes to discovering their functions. Systematic
    genetic mapping in families and populations now helps scientists
    pinpoint the genetic variants that contribute to human disease [35].
-   2. The discovery of genes responsible for more than 5000 Mendelian
    disorders (single-gene disorders like Downs' syndrome, cystic
    fibrosis, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, etc.) has facilitated genetic
    diagnostics for many patients, pregnancy-related counseling, new
    drug treatments, and gene therapies. The discovery of more than
    100,000 associations between genomic regions and autoimmune diseases
    has uncovered new related biologic mechanisms. Risk factors for IBD,
    heart disease, breast cancer, and other conditions are being
    identified, while studies of cancer genomes have revealed hundreds
    of genes in which somatic mutations initiate and propel tumor
    growth. All of these discoveries are providing information that
    advance the development of new drugs [36].
-   3. Genomics research is moving beyond just analyzing DNA variations.
    Through new methods for single-cell RNA sequencing and chromatin
    analysis, researchers are now studying patterns of gene expression
    in individual cells. Tens of millions of cells have been
    characterized thus far with the goal of developing a complete cell
    atlas of the human body. This effort is revealing hundreds of new
    cell types including immune system cells and characterizing the ways
    in which these cell types differ between healthy people and people
    with various diseases including the autoimmune diseases [37].
-   4. Genomic-technology advances like CRISPR-Cas9 (see Chapter 5,
    page 137) will continue to move basic science forward in powerful
    ways, some not yet envisioned. Understanding of human genetic
    variations and their biologic consequences will also advance.
    Increasing abilities to target genetic mutations in vivo with
    oligonucleotides or gene editing should put many Mendelian disorders
    within reach of therapies—and maybe cures. But uncertainties remain
    and not all the big questions can be answered by science alone. How
    do we balance scientific progress with emerging ethical issues
    regarding the use of genome-editing technologies? How do we protect
    the bioethics, privacy, and cultural standards at potential risk?
    These questions need to be addressed regarding the science of
    genetics and genomics, as well as immunogenetics and immunogenomics,
    progress [38].
-   
-   5. Unraveling the genetic and environmental underpinnings of
    autoimmune disease has become a major focus at the National
    Institute of Environmental Health Sciences of the NIH [39]. The
    process of identifying the offending genetic sites (likely multiple
    mutations) in an individual’s genome is overwhelming [40]. As you
    will recall, the potential for those mutations in the sequencing of
    the four base compounds within the 20,000 to 25,000 genes in the
    human genome exceeds 2.53×10²⁰ possibilities spread among the 37.2
    trillion somatic cells. Thanks to AI, more specifically, big data
    analytics and deep learning (convolutional neural networking—CNN),
    genetic loci for immune disorders (immunodeficiencies, autoimmune
    diseases) are now being identified in a timely diagnostic manner
    (days to weeks vs. months to years). This application of AI to
    better identify genetic mutations and their associated disease
    states, combined with the now FDA approved cellular and gene
    therapies presented above, has created new horizons in the
    treatments, management, cures, and prevention of disease [41].
-   6. Predictive and presymptomatic testing is used to detect gene
    mutations associated with disorders that appear after birth, often
    later in life. These tests can be helpful to people who have a
    family member with a genetic disorder, but who have no features of
    the disorder themselves at the time of testing. Predictive analytics
    testing can identify mutations that increase a person's risk of
    developing disorders with a genetic basis, such as certain types of
    cancer. The results of predictive and presymptomatic testing can
    provide information about a person's risk of developing a specific
    disorder and help with making decisions about medical care (see
    Cancers, Chapter 6). Predictive genetic testing is becoming
    increasingly available to the general public, but is not yet
    regulated or closely monitored by the CDC or NIH [42]. Buyer beware.

Chapter highlights on genetics and genomics

-   1. Genetics can be considered the most distinct and essential
    feature of our immune system, particularly in its positive and
    “friendly” innate immune form and function.
-   2. Immunogenetics is the branch of science that explores the
    relationship between the immune system, genetics, and mutations
    (genetic variant, the underlying cause of all abnormalities), while
    immunogenomics is the study of the total human genome or the
    complete set of genetic instruction’s influences on immunity.
-   3. Every person has about 20,000 to 25,000 genes with two copies of
    each gene (diploid pairs), one inherited from each parent.
-   
-   4. Alleles are forms of the same gene with slight differences in
    their sequence of DNA base compounds that contribute to a person’s
    unique physical features (their phenotype).
-   5. Genetics or molecular biology includes the cell, its nucleus,
    chromosomes within the nucleus, the DNA strands within the
    chromosomes, and the base compounds (nucleotides) of the genes
    within the chromosomes.
-   6. The “central dogma of molecular biology” (or “transcriptomics”)
    includes transcription and translation. In transcription,
    information stored in a DNA’s gene sequence is copied to a smaller,
    single-stranded ribonucleic acid molecule called mRNA (messenger
    RNA). Then the mRNA molecule transfers the information (the DNA
    “code message”) from the nucleus into the cell cytoplasm.
-   7. In translation, mRNA interacts with a specialized complex in the
    cytoplasm called a ribosome that reads the transcribed DNA code and
    translates the gene sequence into genetically programmed polypeptide
    chains that bind together to form amino acids and, in a process
    called protein synthesis, the mRNA attaches to a ribosome while
    another type of RNA called transfer RNA (tRNA) binds the amino acids
    together in chains to form functional three-dimensional body
    proteins (tissues, organs, cells, enzymes …you name it).
-   8. All the cellular proteins of the immune system (T and B
    lymphocytes, their surface receptors like HLA, CD proteins, TLRs)
    are all genetically produced and encoded (programmed) from the major
    histocompatibility complex (MHC) genes referred to as “the keys to
    selfrecognition.”
-   9. Immunogenomics reads the genetic code of a person through DNA
    sequencing and studies the interactions of genes with each other and
    with a person’s environment (“precision medicine”).
-   10. Work in X chromosome inactivation (in women), the microbiome
    (“the second genome”), epigenetics (gene modification), and
    cytogenetics (structural gene abnormalities) are being advanced
    through the application of AI’s big data analytics in genetics and
    genomics.

References

1. King's College London. Genetics play a significant role in immunity. 
ScienceDaily . January 5, 2017.

2. Genetics Home Reference (GHR).  What is a gene? U.S . Library of
Congress; July 16, 2019.

3. Biancotto A, McCoy J.P. Studying the human immunome: the complexity
of comprehensive leukocyte immunophenotyping.  Curr Top Microbiol
Immunol . 2014;377:23–60.

4. “The definition of genetics”. Retrieved 25 October 2018.
www.dictionary.com.

5. Transcriptomics . Nature.com; September 29, 2019.

6. What are proteomes?  Uniprot Consortium; January 22, 2020. .

7. Genetics Home Reference.  What is a genome?  U.S. National Library of
Medicine. USA.gov; September 10, 2019.

8. Khan Academy, .  DNA sequencing. Creative commons . Rice
University; 2019.

9. Lindor M.N, Thibodeau S.N, Burke W. Whole-genome sequencing in
healthy people.  Mayo Clin Proc
. 2017;92:159–172. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.10.019.

10. Wetterstrand K.A.  The cost of sequencing a human genome . National
Human Genome Research Institute. NIH. USA.gov; July 10, 2019.

11. Genetics Home Reference.  What is a gene mutation, and how do
mutations occur? NIH . National U.S. Library of Medicine.
USA.gov; October 15, 2019.

12. Zhang S.  Your body acquires trillions of new mutations every day,
and it's somehow fine?  The Atlantic; May 7, 2018.

13. Scally A. The mutation rate in human evolution and demographic
inference.  Curr Opin Genet Dev . December 2016;41:36–43.

14. National Institute of Health.  The human genome project . National
Human Genome Research Institute; 2019.

15. Genetics Home Reference.  What is the precision medicine initiative?
 NIH. National U.S. Library of Medicine. USA.gov; 2019.

16. National Institute of Health (NIH).  The future of health begins
with you. All of Us and Precision Medicine Initiative . U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services (HHS); 2020.

17. Migeon B.  Females are mosaics: X inactivation and sex differences
in disease . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press; 2006.

18. Austin C.P.  Lyonization . National Human Genome Research
Institute; April 4, 2014.

19. Zitvogel L, Ayyoub M, Routy B, Kroemer G. Microbiome and anticancer
immunosurveillance.  Cell . April 7, 2016;165(A):276–287.

20. Lu K, Dong S, Wu X, Jin R, Chen H. Probiotics in cancer.  Front.
Oncol.  2021;11:638148.

21. Matson V, Chervin C.S, Gajewski T.F. Cancer and the
microbiome-influence of the commensal microbiota on cancer, immune
responses, and immunotherapy.  Gastroenterology . 2021;160(A):600–613.

22. Pickard J.M, Zeng M.Y, Caruso R, Núñez G. Gut microbiota: role in
pathogen colonization, immune responses, and inflammatory disease. 
Immunol Rev . September 2017;279(1):70–89.

23. De Luca F, Shoenfeld Y. The microbiome in autoimmune diseases.  Clin
Exp Immunol . 2019;195(1):74–85. doi: 10.1111/cei.13158.

24. Plotnikova O, Baranova A, Skoblov M. Comprehensive analysis of human
microRNA–mRNA interactome.  Front Genet . 2019;10:933.

25. Bi K, Zhang X, Chen W, Diao H. MicroRNAs regulate intestinal
immunity and gut microbiota for gastrointestinal health: a comprehensive
review.  Genes . 2020;11(9):1075.

26. Genetics Home Reference (GHR).  What is epigenetics?  U.S. Library
of Congress; August 6, 2019.

27. Center for Genetics and Society.  Human genetic modification . 2019.

28. Epigenetics Simplified.  A super brief and basic explanation of
epigenetics for total beginners. What is epigenetics . July 30, 2018.

29. Medline Plus, .  Genetic testing . NIH. National Library of
Medicine; April 25, 2019.

30. Campbell M. Genotype vs. phenotype: examples and definitions. 
Genomic Res.  April 18, 2019.

31. Stanford at the Tech Museum Understanding Genetics. Mutations and
disease.  Stanford at the Tech . 2019.

32. He K.Y, Ge D, Hemm. Big data analytics for genomic medicine.  Int J
Mol Sci . February 15, 2017. .

33. Genetics Home Reference.  What is the precision medicine initiative?
 NIH. National U.S. Library of Medicine. USA.gov; October 15, 2019.

34. Genetics Home Reference. NIH, National U.S. Library of Medicine.
USA.gov. Campbell, October 15, 2019. p. 32.

35. The Human Genome Project.  National human genome Research Institute
. January 9, 2019.

36. Wei H, Lai A, Tan E.S, et al. Genetic landscape of congenital
disorders in patients from Southeast Asia: results from sequencing using
a gene panel for Mendelian phenotypes.  Arch. Dis. Childhood
. 2021;106:38–43.

37. ChenLiu Y.L, BingLiu, et al. T cell development: old tales retold by
single-cell RNA sequencing.  Trends Immunol . February
2021;42(2):165–175.

38. Fellner A, Ruhrman-Shahar N, Orenstein N, et al. The role of
phenotype-based search approaches using public online databases in
diagnostics of Mendelian disorders.  Genet Med
. 2021 doi: 10.1038/s41436-020-01085-7.

39. National Institute of Environmental Health Science.  Autoimmune
disease . NIH. USA.gov; 2019.

40. Ramos P.S, Shedlock A.M, Langefeld C.D. Genetics of autoimmune
diseases: insights from population genetics.  J Hum Genet
. 2015;60(11):657–664.

41. Noorbakhsh-Sabet N, Zand R, Zhang Y, et al. Artificial intelligence
transforms the future of healthcare.  Am J Med . 2019;132(7):795–801.

42. What are the types of genetic tests?  U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services National Institutes of Health; September 22, 2020.

Section 2

The enemy within us

Section 2 The enemy within us

1. Introduction

You've completed Section 1 and you're probably saying to yourself, “This
immunology stuff is a bit heavy, but fair dinkum (aka “good stuff” [a
little shout out to my Aussie mates]). And indeed it is. So, what's with
all those innuendos introduced in Section 1? Things like, “the paradox,”
“the enemy,” “…a friend to a degree,” words like “dichotomous, villain,
cryptic,” or that dumb “…Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde” metaphor?” Between the
innate and adaptive immune systems working overtime to defend us,
vaccines to protect us, and our own genes constantly building and
rebuilding immune system molecules and proteins to keep us healthy and
safe, how can our immune system possibly be an “enemy” or a paradox?

Having paid a peaceful, relatively untroubled visit to “our friend,” the
regulated immune system (in Section 1), now it's time to visit the
darker, far less pleasant side of immunity, the “dysregulated” immune
system. We visited it briefly in Section 1, but we have yet to scratch
the surface of the dysregulated side of immunology. This is the side
where the system, in its otherwise supportive efforts, “paradoxically”
begin to produce less-than-positive pathophysiologic (disease) and
clinical problems. Ignoring this troublesome side of the immune system
would be tantamount to an incomplete, frankly inaccurate and
irresponsible portrayal of this vital human system. In fact, given the
harmful nature of the dysregulated immune system, the negative side of
immunity can arguably be considered the more serious and consequential
information and conversation about this otherwise supportive system.
Sorry for disappointing you after singing the praises of the immune
system in Section 1. But, I'm afraid “we're not in Kansas anymore,
Toto.”

So, notwithstanding the accolades and ingratiating Section 1 discussion
about the value of the immune system and its vigilance in defending us,
its synergies with our genes, and its protective immunization features,
it's time to reveal its cryptic nature, its darker side, the dangers of
its dysregulation, and indeed, “the paradox of the immune system” in
health, wellness, and disease. These must be addressed in the context of
a total examination of so vital, powerful, and fundamental a system of
the human body that enigmatically and simultaneously protects us while
posing an existential threat to our health and wellbeing. It is truly
“our best friend and our worst enemy” and thus, as confusing (and
paradoxical) as that might sound, it becomes the compelling reason for
us to understand the dark side of “this enemy within us.” And so, to
stretch the “Oz” metaphor just a bit further (probably stretched too far
already), it's time to “look behind the curtain.”

4: Chronic inflammation

“Enemy #1”

Abstract

The role and function of the immune system is to defend the human
organism from foreign (antigenic) invasion and resultant disease. When
the innate immune response (“our best friend”) is overwhelmed for
multiple reasons by a pathogenic source (substance or stress), adaptive
immunity initiates acute inflammation and hypersensitivity reactions to
arrest the dysregulated condition. If unsuccessful, a separate and
distinct form of inflammation, chronic inflammation develops as its
devastating successor (our “worst enemy” and “a paradox of the immune
system”). Adaptive immunity then induces an array of destructive
cellular and chemical proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines,
pathogenesis, immunohistopathologic, and pharmacodynamic processes. All
of these biologic activities insidiously devolve into all (emphasis on
all) human diseases, making chronic inflammation the progenitor of all
human disease (a unique hypothesis proposed and defended in this
chapter). The chapter includes diagnostic considerations in chronic
inflammation and introduces immunomodulating therapies and presents
chronic inflammation's inextricable role in autoimmune and all other
categories of human disease.

Keywords

Biologics; Hypersensitivity; Hypothesis; Immunohistopathologic;
Monoclonal antibodies; Paradox; Pathogenesis; Pharmacodynamic;
Pro-inflammatory cytokines

Out of suffering have emerged the strongest souls; the most massive
characters are seared with scars.

Kahlil Gibran

1. Introduction

Think for a moment of the words you have heard most frequently mentioned
when listening to news about COVID-19. Certainly, besides masks and
vaccines, among your top choices would likely include “infection” and
“inflammation.” The reason is simple. The COVID-19 pandemic was caused
by an “infectious” agent (i.e., SARS-CoV-2 or the novel coronavirus),
but the adverse clinical effects of that infection, “the disease” if you
will, are a product of “inflammation,” chronic inflammation to be exact.
Whereas acute inflammation produces localized effects, ones that are
usually manageable (per our Chapters 1 and 2 discussion), chronic
inflammation is a diffuse process, one affecting any (and oftentimes,
all) biological tissue(s) or organ system(s) in the body. Generally,
it's safe to say, chronic inflammation is difficult to treat, indeed,
impossible to treat without removal of the cause, when and if possible.

It's inaccurate to single out one infection, or in fact any one
pathological etiology, intrinsic (i.e., inherited, metabolic, hormonal,
neoplastic, immunologic) or extrinsic (i.e., infectious, toxic,
traumatic) that can produce disease in the human organism to qualify it
singularly as chronic inflammation. Rather, as I proposed in the Preface
of this book, it is my hypothesis that the basis of all diseases
(emphasis on all) is chronic inflammation. I recognize the magnitude of
that statement (the qualification “all” not being typically used in
healthcare) and I will take my best shot in this Section (2), using
autoimmune diseases, cancers, and infectious pandemics to defend the
theory.

Whereas most of the intrinsic and extrinsic etiologies mentioned above
convert through secondary physiologic, histologic, pharmacologic,
pathological pathways into chronic inflammation, autoimmune diseases,
and cancers use “primary genetic mechanics” (mutations, genotype,
epigenetics, etc.) as their direct route to chronic inflammation. But
whatever the pathway, secondary pathology or primary genetics, after all
is said and done, the basis of all human disease is chronic
inflammation. As stated in a definitive, comprehensive 2018 article in
Frontiers in Medicine (“Inflammation-Nature's Way to Efficiently Respond
to All Types of Challenges: Implications for Understanding and Managing
“the Epidemic” of Chronic Disease), “… excessive inflammation is a
common thread in all forms of disease development and progression [1].”
I'll spend much of this Section 2 trying to make a case for that
hypothesis.

2. Causes (etiologies) of chronic inflammation [2]

As we emphasized in Chapters 1 and 2, the only effective way to cure a
disease caused by an antigen is to identify (i.e., diagnose) and remove
the antigen. In most cases, the innate or adaptive immune responses are,
by and large themselves successful in eliminating antigens
(selfresolution) and ergo, the dysregulated state regresses toward
normal. Such regression will also aid in the reduction in the active
immune process with or without residual tissue or organ damage depending
on the intensity and duration of the persistent inflammatory state.
Short of antigen removal and resolution of the disease process, one of
five possibilities is likely to cause persistent (chronic) inflammation
(Table 4.1).

-   (1) The diagnosis was incorrect and the antigen (substance or
    stress) was, in fact, not removed.

-   (2) There is an abnormality (a congenital or acquired mutation) in
    the patient's genome making them susceptible to dysregulation of
    their immune system.

-   (3) There is chronic exposure to environmental factors (e.g.,
    toxins, pollution, smoking, microbiota [the microbiome], etc.) that
    serve as a recurring stimulus to inflammation.

-   (4) Accumulating inflammatory byproducts of cellular and humoral
    (chemical) components (proinflammatory cytokines) result in a
    persistent inflammatory and neural stimuli.

-   (5) Finally, the causative antigen may be:

-   -   (a) an inherent disruption to homeostasis (e.g., environmental
        factors, stress);
    -   (b) an innate, unknown autoantigenic factor; or
    -   (c) “rogue B cells” and epitope spreading.

While all five possible causes (above), direct or indirect for chronic
inflammation, in the case of item #5's three factors, the disease
process can be considered an autoimmune disorder. So, effectively,
chronic inflammation (Enemy #1) can be considered the principal etiology
(cause) of autoimmune diseases (to be discussed fully in Chapter 5, when
“self” (autoantigens) becomes Enemy #2 or "our second worst enemy."

 

Table 4.1

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   1. First, the diagnosis was incorrect and the antigen (substance  |
|     or stress) was, in fact, not removed.                             |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   2. Second, there is an abnormality (a congenital or acquired      |
|     mutation) in the patient's genome making them susceptible to      |
|     dysregulation of their immune system.                             |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   3. Third, there is chronic exposure to environmental factors      |
|     (e.g., toxins, pollution, smoking, etc.) that serve as a          |
|     recurring stimulus to inflammation.                               |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   4. Fourth, accumulating inflammatory byproducts of cellular and   |
|     humoral (chemical) components (proinflammatory cytokines) result  |
|     in a persistent inflammatory stimulus.                            |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   5 An abnormal immune response to “self”:                          |
|     -   a. Disruption of homeostasis (Yin Yang);                      |
|     -   b. Innate autoantigens from inflammatory process;             |
|     -   c. “Rogue B cells” and epitope spreading.                     |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

: Theories on etiologies and pathogenesis of chronic inflammation.

Source: Foundations of AI in Healthcare and Bioscience; Catania; Academy
Press. November 2020.

In fact, the five etiologies (causes) and the pathogenesis (disease
process) of chronic inflammation are intimately related to autoimmune
diseases. As such, we'll hold off on an in-depth discussion of the five
causes of chronic inflammation until Chapter 5. Rather, let's first try
to better understand what chronic inflammation actually is (a lot to
unpack here), in fact, the basis of autoimmunity, and the overt and
covert etiology of all autoimmune diseases. Once you understand chronic
inflammation, you will, de facto, understand autoimmunity and autoimmune
disease. You'll see what I mean as you read these next two chapters.

3. Advancing adaptive immunity (from acute to chronic inflammation)

Back in Chapter 2, we described the classic signs of adaptive immunity's
acute inflammatory response (rubor, calor, dolor, tumor, and function
laesa) and its therapeutic strategies. We also described the four
cellular reactions (hypersensitivity or “overreactions”) associated with
the adaptive immune response [3]. These are referred to as the Type I to
Type IV hypersensitivity reactions described in Chapter 2 and always
designated by Roman numerals (for the reason I mentioned as, “Beats
me.”). They included:

-   Type I: The immediate, allergic (or anaphylactic) hypersensitivity
    response;
-   
-   Type II: The cytotoxic hypersensitivity reaction;
-   Type III: The immune-complex hypersensitivity reaction; and
-   Type IV: The cell-mediated, delayed reaction

As we explained, these reactions usually commence during the acute
inflammatory stage (back to Figs. 1.6 and 2.1) where they exhibit their
more classic clinical signs and symptoms. Then we indicated that their
greatest pathophysiological manifestations play their most prominent
role in the chronic inflammatory process. In fact, these four
hypersensitivity reactions are the segue from acute inflammation to
chronic inflammation (remember old Satchel Paige looking over his
shoulder?). On the acute side (mostly the left side of Fig. 2.1), these
hypersensitivity overreactions initiate the inflammatory cascade that we
discussed in some detail back in Chapter 2 (page 31). Now we will
present the immunologic conversion from acute inflammation to its
chronic form represented by the biochemistry and molecules on the right
side of the cascade, plus many more elements of the immune system to be
introduced here. So, be forewarned, this is serious stuff from here on.

4. Differences in chronic inflammation from acute inflammation

One can ask at this point in a discussion on immunology, “So, other than
duration, what's the difference between acute inflammation and chronic
inflammation?” The differences are significant enough to consider
chronic inflammation a distinct and separate disease entity from acute
inflammation, notwithstanding somewhat similar names. (There really
should be a separate and distinct name for chronic inflammation. How
about “pathomelitis” as a neologism? [Etymology: patho = disease; ome =
complete set of; (l)itis = inflammation]. If you agree [after reading
this Section], send your cards and letters to the National Institute of
Health (NIH) recommending the change. But no demonstrations, rallies or
marches, please! Meanwhile, to keep this discussion “contemporary,” I’ll
continue to use “chronic inflammation”…until NIH makes the change
official.)

The distinct difference between acute annd chronic inflammation include:
(1) a difference in the pathophysiology and histopathology (cells and
tissue) between the two; (2) a difference between the pharmacology and
pharmacodynamics between the two; and (3) perhaps of greatest
consequence, a dramatic difference between the clinical course, beyond
duration, of acute versus chronic inflammatory disease. Let's look at
each of these differences more closely to demonstrate the uniqueness of
chronic versus acute inflammation. Rather than repeat illustrations (in
an effort to save trees, and Lord knows we must), let's rely on the
relevant graphic resources from Chapter 2 that we need for this
following discussion. Those graphics from Chapter 2 include Fig. 2.2
(page 33), 2.3 (page 37) and to a lesser degree, Fig. 2.4 (page 38).

[ Figure 4.1  Acute versus chronic inflammation.Besides duration,
chronic inflammation is distinguished from acute inflammation by its
variable and more invasive pathological and histologic (cellular)
comparative counterparts to the acute level.]

4.1. Histopathology and pathophysiology of chronic inflammation

First, let's consider the histopathological (cells and tissue)
differences between acute and chronic inflammation. As opposed to acute
inflammation, chronic inflammation includes unique histopathological
tissue changes, not necessarily to the exclusion of the corresponding
acute inflammatory histopathology counterparts (Fig. 4.1). In chronic
inflammation edema and neovascularization (newly developing, brittle
blood vessels) produce swelling and hardening of the tissue
(induration). Cell junctures loosen and produce cell and fluid migration
through blood vessel walls (diapedesis) allowing inflammatory substances
(cells and byproducts) to continue to accumulate (edema and
infiltration) in the tissue. A combination of cytokines induces a
specialized molecule, the endothelial leukocytic adhesion molecules
(ELAM—right side of Fig. 2.3) that stimulates leukocytic (neutrophil)
adhesion to the endothelial vessel wall. Then cellular migration
associated with surface proteins and chemokines produce blood vessel
wall permeability (diapedesis) and extravasation (escape from
vessel—Fig. 2.4) of the neutrophils.

Localized accumulation of monocytes, lymphocytes, neutrophils (WBCs),
and giant cells (called granulomas) from the inflammatory response
convert to fibroblasts producing further tissue induration and
fibrinization. These granulomatous changes (areas of inflammation)
produce loss of tissue function (functio laesa). Meanwhile, caseation
(cheesy textured tissue), necrosis (dying tissue), and apoptosis
(programmed cell death) are disrupting and destroying tissue. Associated
with all of these cellular dysfunctions are resultant molecular biologic
immunogenomic and proteomic disturbances (disruption of the cellular
proteome [remember the “central dogma of molecular biology” from Chapter
3, page 51?]), the normal cellular proteins expressed by the human
genome and the immunome (remember, the total genes and proteins that
make up the immune system?). You can see that the magnitude of these
histopathological changes in chronic inflammation are quite unique from
acute inflammation (as described in Fig. 4.1) and are far more sinister.

Finally, the clinical course of chronic inflammation distinguishing it
from acute inflammation, beyond duration, is the magnitude of its
pathological consequences on the body at large. As I referenced in the
opening paragraphs of this Chapter, more and more medical experts are
beginning to view chronic inflammation as the progenitor or originating
cause of all major human disease categories [4] (Fig. 4.2). The clinical
basis for this thesis lies in the diffuse and destructive nature of the
chronic inflammatory process. As opposed to the acute inflammatory
reaction, being a localized tissue process, in chronic inflammation the
persistent inflammatory mediators and cellular components can damage
tissue locally (e.g., psoriasis, a skin disease), or in specific organ
systems (e.g., irritable bowel disorder [IBD], a large colon disease),
or throughout the entire body (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus [SLE],
rheumatoid arthritis, diseases affecting multiple tissues and organs).

Perhaps, the most devastating pathophysiological changes in chronic
inflammation (which are also part of acute inflammation) are the changes
in blood vessel walls (adventitia and endothelium) with associated
vasodilation, increase in blood flow, capillary permeability (diapedesis
as described above and in Chapter 2), and migration of neutrophils into
the effected tissue through the inflamed capillary walls
(perivasculitis). The localized, and more so, diffuse nature of these
vascular changes are what makes chronic inflammation the foundation of
the pathological etiologies that precipitate the resultant disease
states.

[ Figure 4.2  Chronic inflammation and disease.Whatever the etiology of
chronic inflammation may be, the pathogenesis results in specific organ
system-related diseases as well as disseminated disease states including
the autoimmune category of disease. Source: Louis J. Catania © 2022.]

The infiltration of primary inflammatory cells such as macrophages,
lymphocytes, and plasma cells in the tissue site(s), produce
inflammatory cytokines, growth factors, and enzymes at a prolonged
level. This contributes to the progression of tissue damage secondary
ulceration, including granuloma formation, fibrosis (aka scarring) and
extended tissue (even DNA) damage. These effects compromise the
tissue(s) and organ system(s), especially the cardiovascular system
(myocarditis), that supply blood vessels throughout the body. As
described above, over time, the tissues and organs, and even the DNA of
their cells break down, producing loss of bodily integrity, tissue
proteomes, proteomics, and the immunome. These changes manifest
themselves as recognizable chronic diseases. And to reemphasize, all of
these devastating clinical changes are occurring diffusely in individual
body tissues as well as organ systems throughout the body, thus the
potential basis for all diseases.

4.2. Pharmacodynamics of chronic inflammation

The second difference between acute and chronic inflammation is equally
profound clinically. It relates to the pharmacology (cytokines,
chemotactic factors, enzymes, hormones, proteoglycans and reactive
molecules) of the inflammatory cascade controlled by complex neurogenic
and nonneurogenic mechanisms (see the right side of Fig. 2.3). It should
be noted here that the drug-related immunotherapies regarding chronic
inflammation will be discussed in depth in Chapter 5, where they apply
to the autoimmune diseases as well. In fact, as we have stated above,
the pathogenesis of all autoimmune diseases discussed in Chapter 5 is
the same pathogenesis described here for chronic inflammation. Simply
stated, autoimmune diseases are the clinical manifestations of the
pathogenesis of chronic inflammation (see the lower half of Fig. 4.2,
“Clinical manifestations”).

The inflammatory cascade is a complex of pharmacologic agents (cellular
and humoral) as well as molecular biologic elements (molecules and
leukocytes) interacting to produce immunochemical responses
(pharmacodynamics) that drive the immune response. Fig. 2.3 diagram
(from Chapter 2) represents only a portion of the elements involved.
Table 4.2 is a limited list of pharmacologic, proinflammatory mediators
[5] and their actions used to immunomodulate the mechanisms that drive
the pharmacodynamics of chronic inflammation. The basis of medical
therapies for chronic inflammation (and its associated diseases
including the autoimmune diseases) is the immunomodulation
(amplifications, supplementation, suppression) of these chemical and
molecular components to elicit therapeutic effects (see also
Immunotherapies, Chapter 5, page 126 and Table 5.4, page 112).

The immune cells discussed in Chapter 1 and 2 (macrophages, monocytes,
etc.) release cytokines such as IL-1, 3, 4 and also tumor necrosis
factor (TNF-α), a cytokine protein responsible for a wide range of
signaling events within cells that lead to necrosis or apoptosis.
Whereas this TNF-α protein is a potent proinflammatory cytokine, it also
has been identified as having an important role in the resistance of
infection and cancers. This paradoxical multitude of actions presents
therapeutic challenges in inhibiting TNF's inflammatory effects while
still protecting its beneficial antiinfection and anticancer properties.
To wit, you'll notice numerous biologics (see Chapter 5, Table 5.4, page
112) directed at TNF inhibition (e.g., Actemra, Orencia, Humira,
Plaquenil, Simponi, Remicade) to allow for alternate drug selections in
an effort to maximize inflammatory inhibition while minimizing
suppression of TNF's antiinfectious, anticancer properties (More on TNF
in Chapter 5). These therapeutic dilemmas exist in a number of treatment
scenarios with chronic inflammation and autoimmune diseases and will be
presented as we progress through the clinical discussions.

I must confess to you that this whole pharmacodynamic process continues
to get more complex. Read this next paragraph slowly and then go back
and reread it. If it still is coming across like a foreign language, put
the book down, select your favorite adult beverage and take a 10 to
15min. walk. But please don't quit on me. I'll try my best to make some
sense of it for you.

Table 4.2

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Inflammatory mediator | # of types            | Action                |
| (label)               |                       |                       |
+=======================+=======================+=======================+
| Histamine (H)         | 10                    | Vasodilation, smooth  |
|                       |                       | muscle contraction,   |
|                       |                       | pain, itching         |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Serotonin (S)         | 3                     | Vasodilation, smooth  |
|                       |                       | muscle contraction,   |
|                       |                       | pain                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Bradykinin (B)        | 3                     | Vasodilation, smooth  |
|                       |                       | muscle contraction,   |
|                       |                       | pain                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Complement (C)        | 4                     | Vasodilation,         |
|                       |                       | vasoconstriction,     |
|                       |                       | smooth muscle         |
|                       |                       | contraction, mast     |
|                       |                       | cell degranulation    |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Leukotriene (LT)      | 4                     | Vasodilation,         |
|                       |                       | vasoconstriction,     |
|                       |                       | smooth muscle         |
|                       |                       | contraction,          |
|                       |                       | chemotaxis            |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Prostaglandin (PG)    | 4                     | Vasodilation, pain    |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Fibrinopeptides (F)   | 1                     | Vasodilation          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Interleukin (IL)      | 6                     | Stem cell             |
|                       |                       | proliferation,        |
|                       |                       | chemotaxis, lysozyme  |
|                       |                       | granule release,      |
|                       |                       | endothelial cell      |
|                       |                       | adhesion, granuloma   |
|                       |                       | formation, fever      |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Tumor necrosis factor | 2                     | Endothelial cell      |
| (TNF-α)               |                       | adhesion, granuloma   |
|                       |                       | formation, fever      |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Colony-stimulating    | 3                     | Stem cell             |
| factor (CSF)          |                       | proliferation         |
|                       |                       |                       |
| Granulocyte (G)       |                       |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
| G                     |                       |                       |
| ranulocyte-macrophage |                       |                       |
| (GM)                  |                       |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
| Macrophage (M)        |                       |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Platelet-activating   | 3                     | Chemotaxis, lysozyme  |
| factor (PAF)          |                       | granule release,      |
|                       |                       | platelet aggregation  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Tranexamic acid (TXA) | 2                     | Smooth muscle         |
|                       |                       | contraction, platelet |
|                       |                       | aggregation           |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

: Proinflammatory mediators.

Source: Louis J. Catania © 2022.

When the circulating leukocytes (WBCs) that escaped from the blood
vessels (diapedesis and extravasation) migrate to the disease site(s),
they are activated by various cytokines and chemokines secreted by the
macrophages and dendritic cells (APCs). On activation, the leukocytes
release additional cytokines and mediators of inflammation. Meanwhile,
those neutrophils (WBCs) are also helping to destroy the antigen by
phagocytosis through the release of reactive oxygenspecies. Cytokines
such as IL-1, IL-6, TNF-α, and T-lymphocytes and B-lymphocytes are an
additional line of defense mediating inflammation through several
complex mechanisms including secretion of cytokines and production of
antibodies and immune complexes (Type III reaction). Circulating
platelets also play a role in this pharmacodynamic process by platelet
aggregation (adhering to the vessel wall forming thrombus) and mast cell
degranulation releasing chemokines and inflammatory mediators [6].

These complex pharmacodynamics in the inflammatory process are being
presented here to set the stage for the basis of immunotherapeutic
(immunotherapy) use in chronic inflammation as well as all of its
associated clinical conditions including the autoimmune diseases,
infectious diseases, and cancers. These immunotherapies will be
discussed briefly below under “Treatment (Immunotherapies)” and then in
greater depth in their clinical applications in Chapter 5's discussion
on general and specific therapeutic use in autoimmune diseases.

I hope these last few paragraphs didn't give you a headache. I'll let up
on the heavy-duty scientific stuff in the next section. Please forgive
me and stick with me.

5. Some (but not all by a long shot) disease categories associated with chronic inflammation [7]

You might be saying to yourself that this chapter on chronic
inflammation doesn't make sense. For the past 80 pages, I've been trying
to make the point that chronic inflammation is the etiology, the
underlying cause, the progenitor (you name it) of all diseases. Yet, up
to this point, I have named only a few specific disease categories
relating to chronic inflammation, specifically the autoimmune diseases
and infectious diseases (not that those few categories alone don't cover
a pretty good amount of all diseases). But, what about prevalent
categories like cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, musculoskeletal,
neurologic, and neurodegenerative diseases? Notwithstanding the list of
additional categories, yet to be mentioned, I continue to stand on my
hypothesis that “ … chronic inflammatory disease is the progenitor or
originating cause of all the major human disease categories.”

A large percentage of the diseases (not necessarily the “disorders”—see
the explanation of the distinction between “disorders and disease” in
the Preface, page xix) in all systemic categories such as dermatology
(e.g., dermatitis); pulmonology (e.g., bronchitis), and many “pulmonary
disorders” like asthma, COPD, emphysema (but remember, “disorder vs.
disease”); ophthalmology (e.g., uveitis, even glaucoma now considered
inflammatory [8]); endocrinology (e.g., Type 1 diabetes [see autoimmune
diseases, Chapter 5]); gastroenterology (e.g., ulcerative colitis, yet
another autoimmune disease), and on and on, all chronic inflammations
(look for the “… itis” suffix). So, what I want to do in this section is
further confirm my hypothesis by illustrating some (not all) of these
major disease categories that are not included in this specific
immunologic discussion, but in fact are directly immunologically related
to chronic inflammatory-based diseases. Allow me to prove my point.

5.1. Cardio and cerebrovascular diseases

Several landmark clinical studies have been done on the role of chronic
inflammation in the incidence of heart attacks and strokes. The findings
in the studies show that a sustained low level of inflammation promotes
the accumulation of cholesterol or plaques in the coronary and cerebral
arteries (atherogenesis). This can trigger an inflammatory response.
These plaques are then perceived by the immune system as abnormal and
foreign to which they then respond by creating a sort of barrier. Once
this happens, loose plaques and blood clots may be the cause of heart
attacks and strokes. This can happen to those even with low blood
cholesterol levels but who have elevated levels of inflammatory markers
in the blood. A recent clinical trial called CANTOS (Canakinumab
Anti-Inflammatory Thrombosis Outcomes Study) proved that targeting
inflammation without changing cholesterol levels can have a significant
impact in reducing the likelihood of heart attacks and strokes by 15%.
It also decreased the need for major interventions such as angioplasty
and bypass surgery by 30%, proving that addressing inflammation to
prevent heart disease is essential [9].

Chronic inflammation, with elevated high C-reactive protein have been
identified as risk factors for cardiovascular disease (CVD). Data have
shown that inflammation has a central and inciting role in the
development of atherosclerosis leading to increased CVD risk. Factors
such as endothelial dysfunction, macrophage accumulation, production of
tumor necrosis factor (TNF-a), IL-1 and IL-6 associated with the chronic
inflammatory process lead to atherogenesis. There is strong evidence
that antiinflammatory biologic drugs, such as anti-TNF-α and anti-IL-6
agents, could control atherogenesis and ameliorate CVD risk. New
research shows that reduced mortality and morbidity using biologic
anti-IL-1b therapy to treat men and women who have had a prior heart
attack provides proof of the pathogenic contribution of inflammation in
the development of CVD [10,11].

5.2. Musculoskeletal disease

Muscles and bones are more prone to physical injury and motion
“disorders” than to biological pathology. Thus, as mentioned in the
Preface of this book, the array of orthopedic abnormalities falls
largely into the category of “disorders” versus “diseases.” Nonetheless,
almost all of us have experienced some sort of physical injury from
trauma, repetitive motion, irregular movements, and of course, aging
joints during our lives (yeah, tell me about them!). But those aging
joints that oftentimes lead to the musculoskeletal “disorders” are in
fact inflammatory in origin. Aging is the consequence of the steady,
prolonged accumulation of cellular damage related to the failure of
clearing necrotic and cellular debris over years. The increasing load of
these “damage-associated molecular patterns” leads to the release of
proinflammatory cytokines (IL-6 and IL-18) causing ongoing low-grade
chronic inflammation [12]. In fact, functional decline of the immune
system with aging is referred to as “immunosenescence” and the active
inflammatory process as “inflammaging” [13].

Yet, in furtherance of the hypothesis of all disease being derived from
chronic inflammation, consider the fact that acute inflammation with its
associated pain and sometimes functio laesa (loss of function) when not
treated (and sometime even when treated) early, will convert into
chronic inflammation (e.g., arthritis, bursitis) and the inexorably
associated physical (musculoskeletal) “… itis” syndromes. A short list
of the more common, often very uncomfortable, and sometimes disabling
musculoskeletal orthopedic bone and joint diseases are included
alphabetically in Table 4.3. And again, such conditions (excluding
congenital and degenerative disorders) are conversions from their
primary etiologies (physical injury, etc.) to immunologic pathogenesis
and resultant chronic inflammation, including some of very common
discomforting, if not disabling bone and joint diseases.

5.3. Neurologic and neurodegenerative disease

The nervous system and the immune system share an intimate relationship
wherein they modulate each other through sophisticated “bidirectional
crosstalk” (see “Neural downregulation,” page 87 below). Contrary to
previous beliefs, the brain is not an “immune-privileged” organ.
Neurological and neurodegenerative (age or genetically related) brain
(central nervous system or CNS) disease shares common hallmarks
including cognitive impairment and loss of brain volume following
inflammation. Nonneural macrophages can infiltrate the CNS and maintain
a separate identity from the brain's glial cells that function as CNS
macrophages. This infiltration of nonneural macrophages suppresses the
glial neural functions (impulse transmission) as invading macrophages
replace the neural (glial) cells [14]. This opens up the possibility for
neural-mediated inflammatory reactions. It also has been identified as
the possible cause of the “brain fog” associated with the COVID-19 long
hauler's syndrome (see Chapter 7, page 195).

 

Table 4.3

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Arthritis                                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Bursitis                                                        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Elbow pain and problems                                         |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Fibromyalgia                                                    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Foot pain and problems                                          |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Hand pain and problems                                          |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Knee pain and problems                                          |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Lateral epicondylitis (tennis elbow)                            |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Low back pain                                                   |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Medial epicondylitis (Golfer's or baseball elbow)               |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Neck pain and problems                                          |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Osteoarthritis                                                  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Osteomyelitis                                                   |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Rheumatoid arthritis                                            |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Shoulder pain and problems                                      |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Tendinitis                                                      |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Tenosynovitis                                                   |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

: Most common chronic inflammatory orthopedic (musculoskeletal)
conditions (Alphabetical).

Innate and adaptive immune cells operating in the inflamed CNS may
impact neurodegeneration. Genome-wide association studies (GWAs—an
approach used in genetics research to associate specific genetic
variations with particular diseases) can help to identify gene variants
that increase the risk of developing these neurodegenerative
inflammatory diseases. Despite a number of different causes (viral
infections, stroke, neoplastic disorders, genetic mutations, trauma, and
epigenetics [chemicals effecting genes—see Chapter 3, page 62]),
neuronal damage is most frequently associated with chronic activation of
an innate immune response in the CNS.

It has become well established that the immune system is inextricably
involved in shaping the brain during development as well as mediating
damage during aging. Intense research is being conducted on these
neuroimmune interactions during development and disease
(immunosenescence). A better understanding of this bidirectional
neuroimmune crosstalk (discussed further on page 82) will be key to
manipulating these responses and developing effective immunotherapies to
reduce the impact of neurodegenerative diseases. Some of these diseases
include Alzheimer's, Parkinson's diseases, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS), Huntington's disease, spinocerebellar ataxia, brain trauma,
epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, and senile dementia [15].

6. Clinical diagnosis and treatment of chronic inflammation

6.1. Diagnostic strategies

As opposed to acute inflammation, chronic inflammation can be difficult
to identify, especially in situations where no precipitating cause
(acute inflammation, antigenic or otherwise) exists. Given the
all-inclusive nature of chronic inflammation as an immunologic disease,
its diagnosis can be organ-specific or disseminated among multiple body
systems (see Fig. 4.2). The diagnostic evaluation includes a thorough
history, physical examination, laboratory testing, and imaging based on
suspected organ-system involvement(s). In all the cases, signs and
symptoms can vary widely.

Nonspecific symptoms associated with chronic inflammation include

1.  • Body pain, arthralgia, myalgia;
2.  • Chronic fatigue and insomnia;
3.  • Depression, anxiety and mood disorders;
4.  • Gastrointestinal complications like constipation, diarrhea, and
    acid reflux;
5.  • Weight gain or weight loss;
6.  • Frequent infections;
7.  • Fatigue;
8.  • Fever;
9.  • Mouth sores;
10. • Rashes;
11. • Abdominal pain;
12. • Chest pain.

Generally speaking, patients with chronic diseases can be somewhat de
facto assumed to have some degree of chronic inflammation [16]. The
Center for Disease Control (CDC) defines chronic diseases as “conditions
that last one year or more and require ongoing medical attention or
limit activities of daily living or both.” [16] Chronic diseases such as
heart disease, cancer, and diabetes also are the leading causes of death
and disability in the United States and are the leading drivers of the
nation's $3.5 trillion in annual healthcare costs [17]. No surprise when
considering the prevalence of chronic diseases. Six in 10 adults in the
US. have a chronic disease. Four in 10 have two or more (comorbidities).
While there are significant numbers of disease states that can be
classified as chronic, Table 4.4 lists the 10 most common chronic
conditions ranked by death rate [18] (this 2019 table does not consider
COVID-19 which became the third leading cause of U.S. death in 2020).
Such prioritized lists vary based on demographic factors (i.e., age,
gender, race, geographic location, and socioeconomics). Notwithstanding
such demographic considerations, as mentioned previously (and pretty
frequently by now), “… chronic inflammatory disease is the progenitor or
originating cause of all the major chronic disease categories.”

Not included in Table 4.4 of chronic diseases is obesity (BMI
>25mg/kg²). When given the CDC's BMI definition of chronic disease and
current epidemiological data on obesity (prevalence, 40.0% among young
adults aged 20–39 years, 44.8% among middle-aged adults aged 40–59
years, and 42.8% among adults aged 60 and older) as well as an increase
of 11.9% from 1999 to 2018 [19], obesity must be considered a chronic
disease, perhaps the leading chronic disease. Unfortunately, this major
disease risk factor (obesity) associated with chronic inflammation
significantly increases the morbidity and mortality of chronic diseases
and now, particularly with Covid-19 [20] (more discussion on this in
Chapter 7). The prevalence of comorbidities with obesity reach levels as
high as 52.3% with common conditions such as hypertension and diabetes
and a corresponding increase in the mortality rates [21].

 

Table 4.4

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   1. Heart disease (death rate 23.0%);                              |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   2. Cancer (death rate 21.3%);                                     |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   3. Unintentional injury (death rate 6%);                          |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   4. Respiratory diseases including asthma and COPD (death rate     |
|     5.7%);                                                            |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   5. Stroke and cerebrovascular disease (death rate of 5.2%);       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   6. Alzheimer's disease (death rate of 4.3%);                      |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   7. Type 2 diabetes (death rate 3%);                               |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   8. Influenza and pneumonia (death rate 2%);                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   9. Kidney disease (death rate 1.8%);                              |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   10. Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis (death rate 1.8%)         |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

: Ten Most Common Chronic Conditions (ranked by death rate).

Source: National Vital Statistics Reports. June 24, 2019. 68(6).

Unfortunately, there are no absolute, specific laboratory tests to
assess patients for chronic inflammation. In fact, such tests are
generally undertaken when the inflammation occurs in association with
another medical condition (comorbidity). Some of these laboratory tests
include serum protein electrophoresis, C-reactive protein, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, and human leukocytic antigen assessment.

6.2. Treatment (immunotherapies)

Chronic inflammation and autoimmune diseases often require treatment
directed at the specific tissue(s) and organ system(s) being adversely
affected or, in the case of diffuse disease, treated in a broader, more
systemic approach. Some of the organ/tissue-specific treatments and
procedures are delivered as targeted strategies directed to the effected
organs (e.g., antithyroid medications for Grave's disease) or tissues
(e.g., topical corticosteroids for psoriasis). In the case of diffuse
multiorgan conditions like cancers, type-1 diabetes, and many of the
autoimmune diseases, more generalized treatments are classified as
immunosuppressive and immunomodulating (suppressing or stimulating)
therapies, referred to as “nonspecific therapies.” These therapies
include types of drugs that are used to suppress dysregulation of the
immune system in chronic inflammation, auto-antigenicity in autoimmune
diseases, or to boost the immune system response in cancers and
antitumor therapies. Immunization and vaccine approaches can also be
considered immunotherapies for infectious and autoimmune diseases [22].

Recent research (2021) [23] has identified a large family of cell
surface proteins (G-protein-coupled receptors or GPCRs) which are key
molecules within the complement system of the immune system (see Chapter
1, page 18). These GPCR molecules have the potential to combat
inflammation by binding with β-arrestin 1 and 2 (Barr), a family of
multifunctional intracellular proteins. By designing ligands (molecules
that binds to another molecule—more on ligands in Chapter 6 on cancer),
preferential coupling can be induced between GPCR and a “decoy receptor”
(DR6) to produce robust Barr protein recruitment leading to biased
signaling (“biased agonism”). This process is a novel and effective
immunologic method to treat chronic inflammation.

But, notwithstanding the different uses of immunotherapies and even
immune-related cellular and genetic procedures (stem cells
transplantation, CRISPR, CAR-T to be discussed in Chapters 5–7), they
all represent “a distinction without a difference.” That is to say, all
the diagnostic entities being addressed (inflammation, autoantigenicity,
autoimmunity, cancers, and tumors) have as their pathogenic basis,
chronic inflammation. Thus, we can say that, notwithstanding the
distinct clinical diagnosis, ultimately we are effectively treating
chronic inflammation.

So broadly speaking, the treatments for chronic inflammation (aka
autoimmune diseases) would include the following:

1.  • Nonspecific therapies;

2.  • The biologics;

3.  • Corticosteroids and NSAIDs;

4.  • DMARDs;

5.  • Checkpoint inhibitors;

6.  • Monoclonal antibodies;

7.  • Immunogenetics and immunogenomics;

8.  -   ○ CAR-T
    -   ○ CRISPR-Cas9
    -   ○ CRISPR-Cas13
    -   ○ mRNA therapy
    -   ○ Transplant therapy

9.  • Regenerative medicine (stem cell transplantation)

To keep this rather broad subject of treatment of chronic inflammation
organized (I hope), I would like to postpone a full discussion of all
the immunotherapies and related drugs and procedures to Chapter 5 on
autoimmune diseases. I think by now you can appreciate the relative
indistinguishable nature of chronic inflammation and autoimmune disease.
So, keeping the discussion of the similar treatments for both might fit
best in Chapter 5's comprehensive discussion (next up) on autoimmune
diseases. I hope you will feel the same as you read Chapter 5.

7. Neural downregulation of the immune system and chronic inflammation

As we have described throughout Section 1, “removal of the cause” is the
most effective means of modulating, suppressing and reversing
inflammation. We also described four specific mechanisms that produce
positive effects in adaptive immunity (Chapter 2, page 26), one of which
was “downregulation” through neuroendocrine and neurogenic pathways. As
you will see going forward in Section 2, sometimes “removal of the
cause” is not a feasible therapeutic strategy by virtue of the
pathophysiologic nature of chronic inflammation and no less, the
prevalent etiology of autoimmune-related chronic inflammation being
“self” (and thus, not removeable). Nonetheless, the body is constantly
striving to maintain or reestablish homeostasis and so too is the case
with chronic inflammation. In such cases, the neurological system
becomes the main player in a highly complex (you didn't expect anything
less now, did you?) set of molecular and chemical actions and reactions
to downregulate (reduce or suppress a response to a stimulus) the immune
system.

Starting with the release of immune mediators and cytokines resulting
from innate immune responses (e.g., signals 1 and 2) triggered by
neuronal stimuli, this humoral/cellular and neural complex amplifies
local responses into inflammation (you might review Figs. 1.4 through
2.1). These systemic neuroendocrine and bidirectional neural responses
result, in most cases, in a resolution of the immune process (i.e.,
acute inflammation) and restoration of the normal homeostatic state. The
brain has immune microglia, macrophages, and dendritic cells that can
produce cytokines and prostaglandins in response to inflammatory stimuli
that can stimulate neural and nonneural brain cell receptors [24]. The
sympathetic nervous system amplifies immune cell activity and makes
bidirectional systemic immune responses possible, while the
parasympathetic nervous system (PNS) and the
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis generally inhibit chronic
inflammation. However, cortisol, a glucocorticoid, is the end product of
the HPA axis and stimulates the hypothalamus to release
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from the anterior pituitary. ACTH
stimulates the adrenal cortex to also produce cortisol. Negative
feedback on glucocorticoid receptors in the hippocampus can cause
cortisol to stop the further release of CRH and ACTH and various others
that can modulate the HPA-axis and nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) which
increases proinflammatory mediators [25]. In a well-regulated system,
immune cells express glucocorticoid receptors allowing cortisol to
inhibit immune cell activation and proinflammatory cytokine release
[26]. (I hope you were able to follow the infamous bouncing ball on that
sequence.)

It has been known for decades that dysregulation of the HPA-axis is
associated with depression. Major depressive disorder and depressive
symptoms are associated with chronic inflammation [27]. Uncontrolled or
dysregulated immune cells, due to prolonged and exaggerated stress
activation may be a factor of greater NF-κB (Nuclear Factor κB,a protein
transcription factor) activity due to reduced cortisol sensitivity.
Cytokines influence the production and metabolism of neurotransmitters
such as serotonin and dopamine which play critical roles in mood. These
effects can be mitigated with antidepressant serotonin inhibitors
combined with nonsteroidal antiinflammatories [28].

Sympathetic innervation links the brain directly to the adrenal medulla
and the “fight-or-flight” phenomenon (increases heart rate, blood
pressure, and breathing rate and diverts blood from nonessential organs
to the major muscle groups and the brain). Upon sympathetic activation,
the adrenal medulla releases catecholamines, epinephrine, and
norepinephrine which can lead to immune dysregulation through
proinflammatory cytokine production and enhance systemic inflammation.
The vagus nerve of the PNS has afferent and efferent nerve fibers for
bidirectional communication between the brain and periphery through
release of acetylcholine. The acetylcholine molecules can then bind to
the α7 nicotinic acetylcholinergic receptor (nAChR) on an immune cell's
surface and inhibit inflammatory expression, resulting in decreased
cytokine production and antiinflammatory effects [29].

The neural response to inflammation is usually rapid and can have an
amplifying or dampening effect on the inflammatory process. But overall,
these neural response patterns aim to maintain normal physiological
homeostasis in response to immune system stimulation and the restoration
of normal tissue function. (Remember in Chapter 1 when I mentioned that
neurologists and brain surgeons could argue equal complexity with
immunologists? This last section kind of makes that case.)

8. Brief research summaries on chronic inflammation

(Reference citations for each research study presented below can be
found in the corresponding footnote. Also, a listing of available
scientific reference sources and databases used by the author are
included in the book's Acknowledgments.)

-   1. Postulating a “universal” disease theory, namely, identifying
    chronic inflammation at the magnitude of being the basis of all
    disease, as I have in this chapter, can easily be misinterpreted as
    an overzealous statement of the breadth and depth of chronic
    inflammation. To address such reasonable doubt, let's use
    immunoinformatics to defend the thesis by quoting a few perspectives
    on chronic inflammation from among thousands of authoritative
    journal articles over the past few years:

-   1.  • Chronic inflammatory diseases are the most significant cause
        of death in the world [30].
    2.  • Schofield A. Inflammation: The Root of All Disease. Vitalfit
        Collective. January 10, 2019.
    3.  • “… inflammatory processes are involved in not just a few
        select diseases, but a wide variety of mental and physical
        health problems that dominate present-day morbidity and
        mortality worldwide” [31].
    4.  
    5.  • “Indeed, chronic inflammatory diseases are the most
        significant cause of death in the world today, with more than
        50% of all deaths being attributable to inflammation-related
        diseases” [32].
    6.  • “Today, chronic inflammatory diseases are at the top of the
        list of death causes.” Medical Press. January 29, 2020.
    7.  • World Health Organization (WHO) ranks chronic diseases as the
        greatest threat to human health [4].
    8.  • “… excessive inflammation is a common thread in all forms of
        disease development and progression” [33].

Thus, per our stated paradox, immunology (specifically, chronic
inflammation) can be “our worst enemy.” Sadly, COVID-19 is a painful
example of this incongruity (see Chapter 7).

-   2. You'll notice in Table 4.4 that cancer is one of the leading
    chronic diseases (#2) associated with chronic inflammation. Of
    course, it is well established that the fundamental cause of cancer
    relates to genetic mutation(s) as will be discussed in Chapters 5
    and 6, but chronic inflammation is its resultant tissue and organ
    pathology. Thus, we will be addressing therapeutic technologies that
    are being used in chronic inflammation (and autoimmune diseases)
    extensively and in cancer treatment as well. In fact, because of its
    high degree of incidence and prevalence, all immunotherapeutic
    agents (i.e., the biologics and nonspecific agents) presented in
    this Chapter's discussion as well as the immunogenetic and genomic
    therapies (to be addressed in Chapter 5) are all being applied to
    cancer at the clinical and research levels [34].
-   3. One interesting immunotherapeutic approach named the “idiotype
    network theory (INT)” is receiving considerable attention in recent
    years. It pertains to the reference made back in Chapter 2 (page 26)
    about “… the very complex system of idiotype antigen-specific B
    cells,” also referred to as the “idiotype network theory (INT).” It
    is being studied extensively as a potential cancer immunization
    therapy. We'll revisit it once more in the Chapter 6 section on
    cancer research [35].
-   4. Antitumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF) drugs are an important
    second-line treatment for rheumatoid arthritis after methotrexate.
    However, patient heterogeneity hinders identification of predictive
    biomarkers and accurate modeling of anti-TNF drug responses. A study
    was conducted to investigate the usefulness of machine learning to
    assist in developing predictive models for treatment response. Using
    data on patient demographics, baseline disease assessment,
    treatment, and single-nucleotide polymorphism array from the
    “Dialogue on Reverse Engineering Assessment and Methods (DREAM):
    Rheumatoid Arthritis Responder Challenge,” a Gaussian process
    regression model was developed to predict changes in the Disease
    Activity Score in 28 joints for patients and to classify them into
    either the responder or the nonresponder group. The method predicted
    changes and correctly classified responses from 78% of patients.
    Gaussian process regression effectively remapped the feature space
    and identified subpopulations that do not respond well to anti-TNF
    treatments. This was the best-performing model in the DREAM
    Challenge [36].
-   5. Using common noninvasive techniques for body composition
    assessment methods (computed tomography [CT], magnetic resonance
    imaging [MRI]) images extracted by these methods can be processed
    with artificial intelligence and radiomic analysis. The idea is to
    search for features that may be extracted from medical images (CT
    and MRI), and that may turn out to be good predictors of metabolic
    disorder and chronic diseases like obesity and cancer. This could
    lead to patient-specific treatments and management of several
    diseases linked with excessive body fat [37].

Chapter highlights (key points and paradoxical-related information)

-   1. Inflammation progresses from acute to chronic when the acute form
    is prolonged due to incorrect or misdiagnosis; congenital or
    acquired mutations; chronic exposure to certain environmental
    factors; accumulating inflammatory byproducts; disruption to
    homeostasis; autoantigenic factor; or “rogue B cells" and epitope
    spreading.
-   2. Chronic inflammation is driven by hypersensitivity or Type I to
    IV “over-reactions” initiated during innate immunity and advanced
    through proinflammatory mediators in the inflammatory cascade.
-   3. Histopathology and pathophysiology of chronic inflammation differ
    from acute inflammation through increased WBC cellular activity
    (particularly neutrophils), giant cells, granulomas, fibroblasts,
    fibrinization, caseation, necrosis, and tissue (and proteomic, DNA)
    destruction, especially in blood vessel walls (perivasulitis).
-   4. The pharmacodynamics of the inflammatory cascade advance through
    proinflammatory cytokines, chemotactic factors, enzymes, hormones,
    proteoglycans and reactive molecules (ELAMs) controlled by complex
    neurogenic and non-neurogenic mechanisms.
-   5. A multitude of paradoxical therapeutic variables producing
    proactive and inhibitory effects (e.g., TNF’s inflammatory effects
    while still protecting its beneficial anti-infection and anti-cancer
    properties) require orchestration of numerous biologics to maximize
    inflammatory inhibition (immunosuppression) while stimulating
    (immunomodulating) selective beneficial cytokine, chemokine,
    enzymatic and cellular immunologic components.
-   6. The vast array of diseases in diffuse systemic and organ specific
    categories as well as all chronic diseases are forms of chronic
    inflammation (diseases ending in “…itis”).
-   7. The etiologies associated with chronic inflammation, specifically
    disruption to homeostasis; autoantigenic factor; and “rogue B cells"
    and epitope spreading, make it synonymous with autoimmune disease.
    In effect, autoimmune diseases can be considered varying forms of
    chronic inflammation (more in Chapter 5).
-   8. Because of its diffuse pathogenic effects, particularly its
    effects on the all-inclusive systemic vascular system, chronic
    inflammatory disease is considered (by this author) to be the
    progenitor or originating cause of all the major human disease
    categories. How about “pathomelitis” as a better descriptive label
    for it?
-   9. Immunotherapies (immunosuppressive and immunomodulating
    therapies) are "non-specific therapies” referred to as “biologics”
    (intrinsic bodily agents) that include types of drugs like DMARDs,
    biologics, monoclonal antibodies, checkpoint inhibitors, etc. used
    to suppress dysregulation of the immune system by modulating the
    immune response in chronic inflammation including cancers and
    anti-tumor therapies.
-   10. Genetic procedures (stem cells transplantation, CRISPR, CAR-T,
    all discussed in Chapters 5, 6 and 7) are all considered
    immunotherapies as well as immunization and vaccine approaches for
    infectious and autoimmune diseases (all in essence, forms of chronic
    inflammation)

References

1. Bennett J.M, Reeves G, Billman G.E, et al. Inflammation-Nature's way
to efficiently respond to all types of challenges: implications for
understanding and managing “the epidemic” of chronic diseases.  Front
Med . 2018;5:316.

2. Cimons M.  Chronic inflammation is long lasting, insidious,
dangerous. And you may not even know you have it . Washington Post
Health; 2020.

3. Serhan C.N, Ward P.A, Gilroy D.W. Fundamentals of inflammation.  Yale
J Biol Med . 2011;84(1):64–65.

4. Han S.  World Health Organization (WHO) ranks chronic diseases as the
greatest threat to human health . HealthLine; July 27, 2018.

5. Proinflammatory cytokine list . Sino Biological; 2020.

6. Pahwa R, Goyal A, Bansal P, et al.  Chronic Inflammation
. StatPearls; 2020 [Internet].

7. Furman D, Campisi J, Verdin E, et al. Chronic inflammation in the
etiology of disease across the life span.  Nat Med . December 25,
2019(12):1822–1832.

8. Baudouin C, Kolko M, Melik-Parsadaniantz S, et al. Inflammation in
Glaucoma: from the back to the front of the eye, and beyond.  Prog Retin
Eye Res . July 2021;83:100916.

9. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics. Update: a report from the
American Heart Association.  Circulation . January 31,
2019;139:e56–e528. .

10. Ridker P.M, Rane M. Interleukin-6 signaling and anti-interleukin-6
therapeutics in cardiovascular disease.  Circ Res . May 17, 2021;128(No.
11).

11. Luigi M, Biasucci L.M, Pedicino D, Liuzzo G. Promises and challenges
of targeting inflammation to treat cardiovascular disease: the
post-CANTOS era.  Eur Heart J . 2020;41:2164–2167.

12. Goldberg E.L, Dixit V.D. Drivers of age-related inflammation and
strategies for healthspan extension.  Immunol Rev
. 2015;265:63–74. doi: 10.1111/imr.12295.

13. Woods J.A, Wilund K.R, Martin S.A, Kistler B.M. Exercise,
inflammation and aging.  Aging Dis . 2012;3:130–140.

14. Limanaqi F, Biagioni F, Gaglione A, et al. A sentinel in the
crosstalk between the nervous and immune system: the
(Immuno)-Proteasome.  Front Immunol . March 29, 2019;10:628.

15. Shouman K, Benarroch E.E. Peripheral neuroimmune interactions:
selected review and some clinical implications.  Clin Auton Res . August
31, 2021:477–489.

16. About Chronic Diseases, .  National Center for Chronic Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion . CDC; October 23, 2019:16.

17. GBD 2017 Causes of Death Collaborators, . Global, regional, and
national age-sex-specific mortality for 282 causes of death in 195
countries and territories, 1980-2017: a systematic analysis for the
Global Burden of Disease Study.  Lancet . 2018;392:1736–1788.

18. Heron M. Division of vital Statistics. Deaths: leading causes for
2017.  Natl Vital Stat Rep . June 24, 2019;68(6).

19. CDC.  Adult obesity facts. Division of Nutrition, physical activity,
and obesity . National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion; June 29, 2020.

20. Pennington Biomedical Research Center, .  Why is obesity so common
in COVID-19 patients?  Medical Press; July 24, 2020.

21. Nguyen N.T, Magno C.P, Lane K.T, et al. Association of hypertension,
diabetes, dyslipidemia, and metabolic syndrome with obesity: findings
from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999 to
2004.  J Am Coll Surg . 2008;207(6):928–934.

22. Mandal A.  Autoimmune disease development of therapies . News
Medical Life Science; May 29, 2019.

23. Pandey S, Kumari P, Baidya M, et al.  Intrinsic bias at
non-canonical, β-arrestin-coupled seven transmembrane receptors
. Molecular Cell; September 27, 2021 (in press).

24. Wrona D. Neural-immune interactions: an integrative view of the
bidirectional relationship between the brain and immune systems. 
J Neuroimmunol . 2006;172:38–58. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2005.10.017.

25. Barnes P.J, Karin M. Nuclear factor-kappaB: a pivotal transcription
factor in chronic inflammatory diseases.  N Eng J Med
. 1997;336:1066–1071.

26. Sapolsky R, Krey L, McEwen B. Glucocorticoid-sensitive hippocampal
neurons are involved in terminating the adrenocortical stress response. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 1984;81:6174. doi: 10.1073/pnas.81.19.6174.

27. Bremmer M.A, Beekman A.T, Deeg D.J, et al. Inflammatory markers in
late-life depression: results from a population-based study.  J Affect
Disord . 2008;106:249–255. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.

28. Raison C.L, Miller A.H. Is Depression an inflammatory disorder? 
Curr Psychiatry Rep . 2011;13:467–475.

29. Tracey K.J. Physiology and immunology of the cholinergic
anti-inflammatory pathway.  J Clin Invest
. 2007;117:289–296. doi: 10.1172/JCI30555.

30. Pahwa R, Jialal I.  Chronic inflammation . StatPearls; 2019.

31. National Center for Biotechnology Information . U.S. National
Library of Medicine; December 25, 2019. .

32. Washington Post health . January 2020.

33. Han S.  World Health Organization (WHO) ranks chronic diseases as
the greatest threat to human health . Bennett: HealthLine; July 27,
2018:1.

34. Kumar A, Swain C.A, Shevde L.A. Informing the new developments and
future of cancer immunotherapy.  Cancer Metastasis Rev
. 2021;40:549–562.

35. Kohler H, Pashov A, Kieber-Emmons T. The promise of anti-Idiotype
revisited.  Front Immunol . March 26, 2019;10:808.

36. Lee A.Y, Ewing A.D, Ellrott K, et al. Combining accurate tumor
genome simulation with crowdsourcing to benchmark somatic structural
variant detection.  Genome Biol . 2018;19:188.

37. Attanasio S, Forte S.M, Restante G, et al. Artificial intelligence,
radiomics and other horizons in body composition assessment.  Quant
Imaging Med Surg . March 10, 2020;10(8):1650–1660.

5: Autoimmune disease

when self becomes the villain

Abstract

As more is learned about the human immune system and its benefits and
liabilities to health and well-being, definitive identification of a
malevolent portion of the system known as autoimmunity results in a
wide-ranging category called autoimmune disease (“our worst enemy”).
These conditions present with the characteristic signs of chronic
inflammation and follow a chronic, unremitting course. Most are still a
mystery and occur (greater in women by 2 to 1) when, for an array of
currently unknown reason(s), the system doesn't seem to distinguish self
from nonself (“the paradox of the immune system”). Elusive “autoantigen”
(autoantigenicity) theories abound including a prolonged inflammatory
process, a patient's genome, environmental stimulants, accumulation of
proinflammatory cytokines, X chromosome factors, “rogue B cells” epitope
spreading, and even the microbiome. Classifications range from specific
tissue or organ system involvement to indiscriminate, diffuse,
multisystem afflictions. The use of immunopharmacologic therapies
(biologics, cytokines, monoclonal antibodies, checkpoint inhibitors),
gene editing (CRISPR-Cas9), gene replacement (CAR-T), stem cell
transplantation (regenerative medicine), and transplant therapies is
described and discussed.

Keywords

Autoantigen; Autoimmunity; Biologics; Checkpoint inhibitors; Cytokine;
Epitope spreading; Genome; Immunotherapy; Microbiome; Monoclonal
antibodies; Rogue B cells

She walked with the universe on her shoulders and made it look like a
pair of wings.

Ariana Dancu

1. Introduction

Now we begin to add more drama to “the paradox of the immune system.”

Antigens, by definition, are “foreign.” But as we learn more about the
immune system, it has become apparent that “foreign” may not be entirely
synonymous with “nonself.” When, for some unknown reason, the body
incorrectly identifies itself (i.e., self) as foreign (i.e., nonself),
effectively, the body becomes an “antigen” and generates a process
referred to as “autoantigenicity.” This process initiates an adaptive
immune response directed at … you got it—itself. Stated another way, the
immune system has the potential to produce an “autoimmune response.”

2. Female predilection for autoimmune disease

Autoimmune disease develops after immune dysregulation in both the
innate and adaptive immune systems. This category of immune diseases
occurs in females at a rate of two to one over males (6.4% of women vs.
2.7% of men) [1]. In fact, it is estimated that 78% of people affected
with autoimmune diseases are women [2]. There are an abundance of
theories as to why there is such a strong female predilection to
autoimmune diseases. Some are based on speculation, but most on
evidence-based science [3]. A listing (and labeling) of some of those
possible causes include:

1.  • Male testosterone protection (speculation);
2.  • Pregnancy factors (evidence-based science);
3.  • Gene expression (evidence-based science);
4.  
5.  • Embryologically, women confer first immunity to their babies
    suggesting a stronger immune system than the father (evidence-based
    science);
6.  • “Pregnancy brain” (I mentioned this back in Chapter 1, page 5)
    where fetal cells from the embryo transfer to the mother during
    pregnancy and remain in her brain for life producing a “potential”
    autoantigenic effect (evidence-based science and speculation);
7.  • Women, as traditional caregivers, suggest a kind of phylogeny
    (evolutionary development of women seems to produce more absolute
    lifelong antibody levels than men) thus producing a stronger immune
    system but increased risk for innate immune dysregulation
    (speculation);
8.  • Females tend to have more body fat than males, thus more immune
    cells (evidence-based science);
9.  • Women live longer, thus producing more antibodies that contribute
    to the longer life, but also create a greater potential risk for
    dysregulation and abnormal homeostasis (speculation);
10. • The “hygiene hypothesis” (see page 60) which compromises the
    microbiome and increases the risk of autoimmune disease (greater in
    females due to sexual dimorphism) (evidence-based and speculation);
11. • Probably more theories abound, including any you might think of
    and certainly, the topics of discussion presented in the balance of
    this chapter.

2.1. XCI (lyonization)

Perhaps the most credible and validated, science-based theory regarding
female bias in autoimmune diseases lies in the immunogenomic science we
have introduced in Chapters 1 (page 5) and 3 (page 58), that is the X
chromosome inactivation (XCI) or “lyonization” and its intimate
relationship with microRNA. From this validated hypothesis, a number of
explanations for female predilection for autoimmune diseases have
evolved. One such explanation suggests that about 15% of genes escape
the XCI process (called “escapees”), including among them CD40L, CD99,
LAMP-2, IRAK-1, TLR7, USP27X, DDX3X, CXORF21, and XIAP (some of the ones
I asked you to remember from Chapter 1—yeah, right!), all of which
recent research has confirmed as primary attributions to the female bias
of autoimmune diseases, especially SLE [4]. These escapees also play a
significant role in oncogenesis (cancer production) and will be further
discussed in Chapter 6, page 158.

It is well understood that sex hormones are an enormous factor in the
regulation and dysregulation of immunity. Predominant influences of
female estrogen and progesterone both increase and decrease
proinflammatory mediators and are believed to be responsible for
autoantibody development, autoimmune stimulation, and corresponding
autoimmune diseases [5]. More so, perhaps, estrogens regulate microRNAs
(miRNA), the noncoding RNA gene abundant on the female X chromosome and
essential in gene expression (as mentioned in Chapter 3). This
relationship of the X chromosome, in combination with XCI and XCI
“escape,” provides the basis of “protection” (vs. risk) for females
against certain cancers and an increased risk for males (yet another
immune paradox) [6]. This paradox of the complex XCI immune phenomenon
will be revisited once more in Chapter 6. But after all is said and done
regarding definitive causes of autoimmune diseases (and cancers),
understanding their etiologies remain relatively nascent and will
require an enormous amount of continuing research.

3. Theories on the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases [7]

There are several theories as to the cause(s) of the idiosyncratic
autoimmune responses that we will examine. But whatever the cause(s),
the response has created an entirely separate disease category referred
to as “autoimmune disease.” Table 5.1 reveals an impressive (and
ominous) list of some (28 from about 80 plus) prevalent autoimmune
diseases. As mentioned previously in Chapter 3 and just above, despite
the fact that the etiology of this disease category remains unknown or
at least open to multiple hypotheses, its pathogenesis (development) and
thus, its therapeutic strategies are similar to those of chronic
inflammation in that chronic inflammation is the immunological basis and
process responsible for autoimmune diseases. Thus, rather than repeating
extended descriptions of the pathogenesis and immunotherapies of chronic
inflammation presented in Chapter 4, I will be referring (numerous
times) throughout this Chapter back to Chapter 4, Chronic inflammation:
The “ultimate enemy.”

The cause(s) of autoimmune diseases remain unknown, but research has
strongly suggested a pathogenesis (“natural history”) of the disease
progressing over time and insidiously producing its damage. The path of
the disease includes five possible (probable?) causes (Table 5.2) which
I'm sure you will recall their similarities from our Chapter 4
discussion (and Table 4.1, page 73) regarding the etiologies of chronic
inflammation. As discussed in Chapter 4, the etiologies of autoimmune
diseases and those of chronic inflammation are virtually identical, thus
making the two entities synonymous, one with a clinical label
(autoimmune disease) and one as a pathological classification (chronic
inflammation). Now, let's examine both of them a little more closely as
to their suppositions and their factual basis.

Table 5.1

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| 1.  • Alopecia areata | 1.  • Hemolytic       | 1.  • Psoriasis       |
| 2.  • Ankylosing      |     anemia            | 2.  • Raynaud's       |
|     spondylitis       | 2.  • Idiopathic      |     phenomenon        |
| 3.  • Antibody        |     thrombocytopenic  | 3.  • Reactive        |
|     syndrome          |     purpura           |     arthritis         |
| 4.  •                 | 3.  • Inflammatory    | 4.  • Rheumatoid      |
|     Antiphospholipid  |     bowel disease     |     arthritis         |
| 5.  • Autoimmune      | 4.  • Juvenile        | 5.  • Scleroderma     |
|     hepatitis         |     arthritis         | 6.  • Sjogren's       |
| 6.  • Behcet's        | 5.  • Mixed           |     syndrome          |
|     disease           |     connective tissue | 7.  • systemic lupus  |
| 7.  • Celiac disease  |     disease           |     erythematosus     |
| 8.  • Crohn's Disease | 6.  • Multiple        |     (SLE)             |
| 9.  • Dermatomyositis |     sclerosis,        | 8.  • Takayasu        |
| 10. • Giant cell      | 7.  • Myasthenia      |     arteritis         |
|     arteritis         |     gravis            | 9.  • Temporal        |
| 11. • Granulomatosis  | 8.  • Polyarteritis   |     arteritis         |
|     with polyangiitis |     nodosa            | 10. • Type 1 diabetes |
| 12. • Graves' disease | 9.  • Polymyalgia     | 11. • Ulcerative      |
| 13. • Guillain-Barre  |     rheumatica        |     colitis           |
|     syndrome          | 10. • Polymyositis    | 12. • Vasculitis      |
| 14. • Hashimoto's     | 11. • Primary biliary | 13. • Vitiligo        |
|     disease           |     cirrhosis         |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

: Listing of prevalent autoimmune diseases.

[image]

Source: Foundations of AI in Healthcare and Bioscience; Catania; Academy
Press. November 2020.

 

Table 5.2

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   1. A prolonged inflammatory process from failure to eliminate an  |
|     antigen;                                                          |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   2. Patient's genome;                                              |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   3. Environmental factors;                                         |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   4. Increasing release and accumulation of proinflammatory         |
|     cytokines;                                                        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   5. Abnormal immune response to self through “rogue B cells” and   |
|     epitope spreading                                                 |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

: Theories on etiologies and pathogenesis of autoimmune disease.

Source: Foundations of AI in Healthcare and Bioscience; Catania; Academy
Press. November 2020.

3.1. A prolonged inflammatory process from failure to eliminate an antigen

If everything in this world that is not “self” is antigenic to self,
based on the discussion in Chapter 2, it would seem both logical and
mathematical that the overwhelming percentage of antigenic attacks on
self are controlled by our innate (natural) immunity (remember, our
“friend?”). Occasionally, however, antigens are not removed in a timely
fashion or continually reoccur through reexposure, an example of which
would be a persistent allergen (seasonal or otherwise). Inability to
remove an antigen will continually stimulate the innate immune system
with resultant accumulating cellular, humoral, molecular byproducts that
begin to trigger the adaptive immune response. Notwithstanding a
powerful and inclusive innate defense system, pathogenic antigens can
breach this immune barrier and result in the adaptive immune response
(discussion from Chapter 2). Some of those pathogens prove to be
virulent enough to resist or even overcome the body's adaptive response.
In such cases, the immune system continues to “fight the fight,” the
results of which produces prolonged chronic inflammation (discussion
from Chapter 4) and the clinical sequalae of that prolonged process
resulting in clinical damage to tissue(s) and organ(s) systems (as found
in autoimmune disease).

Here's an ideal place to revisit the concept of “stress antigens” that
we mentioned a number of times in previous chapters. A nonsubstance
entity like mental, emotional, physiological, or physical (injury)
stress can disrupt the normal homeostasis (maintenance of a stable
balance) of the immune system, and thus, is interpreted as “nonself”
(admittedly, non-substance) [8], “foreign” or technically, an antigen.
Now with that in mind, think back to “ulceration” in the acute
inflammatory cascade from Chapter 2, page 31. Remember how an acute
inflammatory reaction (from a demonstrable antigen) without proper care
can lead to the destruction and loss of healthy tissue, eventual
scarring, functional loss (“functio laesa”), and even DNA disruption?
When we extended that dysregulated process to chronic inflammation
(Chapter 4, page 88), we added caseation (cheesy textured tissue),
necrosis (dying tissue) and apoptosis (programmed cell death)
disruption, and an accumulation of toxic byproducts.

All of these inflammatory (acute and chronic) disturbances in the immune
system cause a dysregulation in homeostasis “or stress” on the system.
This physiological stress can be considered an autoantigen that began
with an antigenic reaction and eventually generated a cycle of
autoantigenicity (from homeostatic imbalance inciting neurogenic and
neuroendocrine reactions) collectively referred to as a “clinical
autoimmune cycle” (Fig. 5.1—diagram #8: yet another addition to our
growing immune system flow diagram—and we're not done yet).

3.2. Patient's genome

Abnormalities (inherent or mutational) in the patient's genome can make
it susceptible to dysregulation. People's genes are what “predispose” or
provide them with a genetic susceptibility to dysregulate the immune
system. This in turn yields chronic inflammation and, in effect, creates
the pathologic damage to cells, tissues, and organ systems synonymous
with autoimmune diseases. Almost every aspect of the immune system
contributes to the pathogenesis of autoimmunity. Complicated
interactions between genetic variants, epigenetics (nonaltered DNA
modifications of phenotype gene expression) and environmental factors
produce a multitude of pathways that lead to autoimmune diseases [9].
(More discussion on genetics, the genome, and autoimmunity below.)

[ Figure 5.1  Clinical autoimmune cycle—diagram #8.Acute and chronic
disturbances in the immune system secondary to the inflammatory cascade
cause a dysregulation in homeostasis leading to an autoantigenic
(created by “self”) stimulus producing a clinical autoimmune cycle (note
this cycle is an addition to the growing immune system flow diagram
starting with the APC diagram back in Chapter 1, Fig. 1.3). Source:
Louis J Catania © 2022. ]

3.3. Environmental factors

Endogenous (internal) autoantigens include such things as metabolic and
immune byproducts, “rogue B cells” and epitope spreading (discussed
below), stress, genetic mutations, etc. However, most antigens we
encounter are external, “nonself” substances that the body may interpret
as toxic. Pollution, allergens, pathogens, mechanical or physical injury
or irritation, smoking, chemicals, insect bites, stings, etc. all can be
considered environmental factors or antigenic toxins as discussed in
Chapters 1 and 2. In combination with the inherited alleles that an
individual possesses for a specific gene (the genotype), a given
environmental factor can produce a “phenotype trigger” to produce the
clinical manifestations of autoimmune disease.

Consider the person who has smoked all their life without ever
experiencing the classic, associated diseases (respiratory,
cardiovascular, carcinogenic). One (like an aging, inveterate smoker)
would use this as an argument that smoking is not a risk factor. On the
contrary, that individual “rolled the dice” (unknowingly) on not having
the specific gene(s) and alleles to induce a smoke-related disorder, and
he/she won. But epidemiologic studies have unequivocally concluded that
there is a greater risk of having one or more “phenotype triggers” for
smoking induced disorders than not. Of course, this applies to all
environmental factors as well.

But the free-will choices we make regarding what we will or will not
expose ourselves to (i.e., risks) range from people's common sense (or
lack thereof) to practicing good personal and public health measures
(e.g., smoking, or of late, wearing a mask, and a vaccination during an
infectious pandemic). Indeed, the environmental factors we choose differ
considerably from the ones our genes choose for us (from allergies to
infections to cancers). Heredity patterns and DNA testing (karyotypes)
tell us a great deal about these environmental risks, some obvious, and
some buried in our genome. (Maybe generalized DNA screening as a
preventive health measure, or at very least a diagnostic tool, might be
worthwhile? I believe it is and I hope we will see it as routine in the
future. But again, its ethical implementation will be a “buyer beware”
situation, if not tightly regulated.)

3.4. Increasing release and accumulation of proinflammatory cytokines

As the immune system fights off foreign antigens, it is continually
releasing inflammatory proteins called “proinflammatory mediators.” If
the pathological antigen is not successfully eliminated in a timely
fashion, these proinflammatory mediators accumulate in the tissue and,
by virtue of their abnormally large detritus, they are interpreted by
neurogenic pathways (see page 87) and by the adaptive immune system as
antigenic (foreign). This perpetuates an autoimmune response. As
described previously, this phenomenon of an accumulation of inflammatory
cytokines was highlighted in Chapter 2 (page 31) in the discussion of
acute inflammation and “dysregulation” of the immune system. In that
instance we talked about heat generation by pyrogenic mediators
(particularly interleukin that produces a “leukocytic pyrogen” as a
byproduct) resulting in “calor” and fever (increased body and tissue
temperature) as a classic inflammatory feature. The overabundance of
these pyrogenic mediators create overly aggressive immunogenic signals
that produce an “attack” on the body (another paradox) rather than
beneficial, communicating signals of the inflammatory process [10]. This
could generate an antigenic response, or more appropriately termed an
“autoantigenic, autoimmune response,” yet another source of a “clinical
autoimmune cycle” as described above and in Fig. 5.1.

3.5. Abnormal immune response to “self” through “rogue B cells” [11] and epitope spreading [12]

Autoimmune disease can simply be stated as an “abnormal immune response
to ‘self’.” But such a simple statement belies the many theories that
abound as to the cause and true pathogenesis of this disease category.
Currently, as we have discussed above in our female versus male
“autoimmune disease contest,” the exact cause of autoimmune disease is
unknown. One theory is that some microorganisms (such as bacteria or
viruses) or drugs may trigger changes that confuse the immune system.
This may happen more often in people who have genes that make them more
prone to autoimmune diseases [13]. But a new concept being promoted now
(also genetically related, but poorly understood) is the “rogue B cell”
and epitope spreading. This is another subject I'll ask your indulgence
on because of its complexity, but it is an absolute “must” for
understanding autoimmune disease. I personally believe it to be one of
the strongest theories on autoimmune disease etiologies (along with
XCI), but you'll have to decide that for yourself.

Back in Chapter 1, I urged you to fully understand the concept of the
antigen presenting cell (APC) because of its continuing participation in
both the innate and the adaptive immune response. I also made somewhat
of a big deal over the T and B cells, the “infantry and special forces”
as I called them of both innate and adaptive responses. And I think you
will agree by now that my urging was fairly accurate given all we've
discussed about the roles of T and B cells up to this point. Now, I'll
need your heightened attention as we take their functions to a new
level, not necessarily a good one either. (Perhaps we should record this
as yet another paradox.)

You'll recall that the T_(H) cells form APCs and activate B cells that
are responsible for antibody production in response to an antigen.
Antigens have small sites on their surfaces called epitopes or
“antigenic determinants” that bind to a genetically predetermined
corresponding receptor on the surface of the B cell (from our
“antibody-encoding gene” discussion in Chapter 1, page 16). These B-cell
receptors and epitopes are programmed genetically through the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC—see page 11) on the T cells
(specifically, T_(H) MHC Class 2 CD4 and MHC Class 1 T_(C) CD8) again,
as described in Chapter 3. When toll-like receptors (TLRs or the “sentry
cells”) signal MHCs that they have identified an infectious agent (i.e.,
bacteria and viruses) or tumorigenic antigens (carcinogens), the B cells
undergo changes in their genes to produce antibodies that create strong
attachments to the antigens' epitopes. (Every time I think about that
process, I'm amazed!) This reaction also produces plasma cells that
proceed to produce large amounts of antibodies. (Please don't quit on me
now. I promise you, there's a pony in here and I'm getting to it.).

During this rapid proliferation and dispersion (or “spreading”) of
antibodies from plasma cells, some B cells become “confused”
(genetically altered) and begin to mistakenly interpret “self” as
antigenic. This results in B-cells binding with “self” (yep, “you”) at
local and distant sites. These autoantibody B cells are called “rogue B
cells” and their migration is called “epitope spreading [14].” This
spreading is what produces the clinical picture of the many autoimmune
diseases whose signs and symptoms “spread” insidiously
(Machiavellian-like) or gradually over time, from one organ to another,
as well as among immune cells themselves. This spreading effect produces
the diverse array of autoimmune diseases (e.g., from rheumatoid
arthritis [RA] to Crohn's disease to kidney disease and on and on) and
from one tissue type to another (e.g., from psoriatic skin disorders or
nerve damaging multiple sclerosis [MS]) [15]. As you probably know,
hopefully not directly, but through an unfortunate friend with an
autoimmune disease that they usually suffer multiple autoimmune
ailments.

It is theorized that this “rogue B-cell—epitope spreading” phenomenon is
a product of dual genetic influences (messages) to the immune system.
One influence occurs when genetic messages, along with other
immune-stimulating factors (Chapter 4, page 72) tell the immune system
to attack. Meanwhile, other beneficial messages (probably from Treg,
T_(C) cells, apoptosis, neural downregulation, etc.) silence the immune
system and try to stop it from dysregulating [16]. As you will see in
the discussion on immunotherapies, both of these signals can be
harnessed (to immunomodulate or immunosuppress) in treatments
(especially in cancers). If the genetic influence is producing an
autoimmune stimulus to attack (self), certain drugs like topoisomerase
inhibitors (antimetabolites that suppress DNA synthesis) may prove
valuable. Conversely, if the genetic influence is silencing the immune
system (reducing the autoantigenic effects, i.e., “a friend”)
stimulating the system with proinflammatory biologics might be
beneficial. And voilà –the pony! Needless to say, in this paradox, a
very delicate balancing act is required [17].

You can see from this description that “rogue B cells” and epitope
spreading have dramatic, negative potential for producing autoimmune
diseases. However, you should also appreciate that understanding and
scientifically manipulating this associated plasma cell antibody
production and epitope spreading has the potential for enormously
positives effects such as vaccine production. Also, another potential
benefit from this phenomenon, under intense investigation, is to
immunologically manipulate and regulate this rogue B cell, epitope
spreading process in cancer therapies as mentioned above in the genetic
messaging. Finally, during the early 2022 proofreading portion of this
book, there was a new report on rogue B cells being implicated in
advanced COVID-19 infections. We'll address this interesting late
development in Chapter 7 on COVID-19.

3.6. The microbiome

One more quick visit to “the second genome,” the microbiome. While a new
area of biomedical research, the microbiome has found a place in the
theories of almost all human pathogenesis (not unlike the theory of
chronic inflammation as the basis of all disease). And indeed, as we
described in Chapter 3 (page 60), “… the constant 24/7 exposure of gut
microbes to immune cells, from birth on, creates a chronic (even-if
subclinical most of the time) inflammatory condition in all human
biological systems.” Thus, the microbiome in an unrelenting effort to
control chronic inflammation becomes a mitigating force against chronic
inflammation, autoimmune disease, even cancers as it modulates the
immune system. This function is illustrated in the potential etiologies
of autoimmune diseases.

Conversely (just to confuse the whole picture just a bit further—like we
need that, right?), dysbiosis (that imbalance in gut microbiome) is
another important environmental factor that has been linked to the onset
of different autoimmune diseases. The “gut microbiota—innate immunity
axis” and symbiotic bacteria (short-chain fatty acids or SFCA)
upregulate IL-6, IL-12, IFN, and TNF and further contribute to the
pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases. Finally, epigenetic modulation (see
Chapter 3) from SCFA metabolic by-products and interactions between gut
microbiota and the innate immune system disrupt homeostasis and also
contribute to the pathogenic process of autoimmune diseases [18]. To
wit, recent studies have produced results confirming the effectiveness
of probiotics in human nutrition by modulating SCFA production by the
intestinal microbiome [19]. But the “gut microbiota—innate immunity
axis” and symbiotic bacteria are only a small part of the microbiome's
influence on pathogenicity. So let's not get too excited about
probiotics quite yet.

4. Classification of autoimmune diseases

As presented in Chapter 4, the effects of chronic inflammation are
profound and broadly deleterious to tissues and organ systems throughout
the body. A principal reason for this diffuse pathological process is
the affect chronic inflammation has on the network of blood vessels
(particularly their adventitia and endothelial lining of their
walls—called perivasculitis) that supply all of the bodily tissues and
organs (see Chapter 4, Fig. 4.2). Whereas, the underlying cause of the
disease process is in effect chronic inflammation, the clinical
manifestations present themselves as specific tissue and organ system
diseases (secondary to the chronic inflammation—Fig. 4.2, Chapter 4).
These pathological effects manifest themselves in the form of clinical
entities categorized as the autoimmune diseases.

As mentioned above in our description of epitope spreading, it is more
than likely that this phenomenon contributes to the nature of autoimmune
diseases as being specific to a bodily organ or tissue, and conversely
being distributed, diffusely among multiple organ systems or tissues
throughout the body. This “rogue B-cell” effect combined with the
pervasive focal and diffuse vascular effects of chronic inflammation
produces the multisystem organ/tissue-specific clinical manifestations
(also diagnosed as multisystem inflammation syndrome in children or
MIS-C) [] or the diffuse clinical picture synonymous with autoimmune
diseases (Table 5.3). When considering the multiple theories of the
pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases, it is apparent that there are, in
fact, numerous causes (persistent antigens, environmental, autoantigens,
etc.) beyond strictly the vascular and epitope spreading components we
describe. However, as posited throughout this discussion, we come back
to the ultimate predicate that the adaptive immune response leads to
chronic inflammation, that ultimately leads to all autoimmune diseases.

In summary, to restate once more because of its clinical importance, by
virtue of their etiologies (vascular and epitope spreading, and others
no doubt), their pathology (chronic inflammation), and their immunologic
molecular biology (cells, cytokines, proteins, etc.), the clinical
presentations of autoimmune diseases can be classified as being
associated with specific tissue(s) or organ system alone (e.g.,
psoriasis or Crohn's disease); or associated with multisystem organs and
tissues simultaneously (e.g., RA or systemic lupus erythematosus [SLE]).
It should also be noted that multiple autoimmune diseases, organ
specific and/or diffuse, can occur simultaneously in the same patient
(talk about an even more confusing diagnosis?) making the diagnosis of
autoimmune diseases infinitely more difficult [20].

Table 5.3

  Autoimmune Disease (alphabetical)   Diffuse   Organ or tissue specific   Body system or tissue effected
  ----------------------------------- --------- -------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Alopecia areata                     [icon]                               Hair follicles, patchy hair loss
  Ankylosing spondylitis                        [icon]                     Vertebral and sacro-iliac joints.
  Antiphospholipid                    [icon]                               Increased blood clotting
  Autoimmune hepatitis                          [icon]                     Liver inflammation
  Behcet's syndrome                             [icon]                     Blood vessel inflammation (mouth)
  Celiac disease                                [icon]                     Small intestines disease
  Crohn's disease                               [icon]                     Entire gastrointestinal tract
  Dermatomyositis                               [icon]                     Dermatological disease
  Giant cell arteritis                [icon]                               Diffuse vascular inflammation
  Granulomatosis with polyangiitis    [icon]                               Diffuse vascular inflammation
  Graves' disease                               [icon]                     Thyroid gland disease
  Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS)       [icon]                               Peripheral nerve involvement
  Table Continued                                                          

  : Classification of autoimmune diseases by clinical presentation.

[image]

  Autoimmune Disease (alphabetical)     Diffuse   Organ or tissue specific   Body system or tissue effected
  ------------------------------------- --------- -------------------------- ---------------------------------
  Hashimoto's disease                             [icon]                     Thyroid gland disease
  Hemolytic anemia                                [icon]                     Red blood cells destroyed
  Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura   [icon]                               Blood clotting inability
  Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)                [icon]                     Inflammation of the colon
  Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA)   [icon]                               Joint inflammation in children
  Mixed connective tissue disease       [icon]                               Variable signs throughout body
  Multiple sclerosis                              [icon]                     Brain and spinal cord (CNS)
  Myasthenia gravis                               [icon]                     CNS and neuromuscular junction
  Polyarteritis nodosa                  [icon]                               Necrotizing vasculitis
  Polymyalgia rheumatica                [icon]                               Muscle pain esp. Shoulders/hips
  Polymyositis                          [icon]                               Inflammatory myopathy (muscles)
  Primary biliary cirrhosis                       [icon]                     Destruction of bile ducts
  Table Continued                                                            

[image]

  Autoimmune Disease (alphabetical)    Diffuse   Organ or tissue specific   Body system or tissue effected
  ------------------------------------ --------- -------------------------- ---------------------------------------
  Psoriasis                                      [icon]                     Dermatological disease
  Raynaud's phenomenon                           [icon]                     Decreased blood flow to fingers
  Reactive arthritis                   [icon]                               Joint disorders caused by infection
  Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)            [icon]                               Diffuse inflammation of joints
  Scleroderma                                    [icon]                     Disease of skin and connective tissue
  Sjogren's syndrome                             [icon]                     Disease of mucocutaneous tissue
  Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLA)   [icon]                               Involvement of all organs/tissues
  Takayasu arteritis                             [icon]                     Inflammation of heart and aorta
  Temporal arteritis                             [icon]                     Inflammation of temporal artery
  Type 1 diabetes                                [icon]                     No insulin from pancreas
  Ulcerative colitis                             [icon]                     Inflammation of colon
  Vasculitis                           [icon]                               Inflammation of blood vessels
  Vitiligo                             [icon]                               Loss of skin pigmentation

[image]

5. General clinical considerations with autoimmune diseases [21]

Throughout our discussions of specific autoimmune disease entities, you
will recognize common denominators in their diagnosis and treatments (as
mentioned previously in Chapter 4, page 86 on “nonspecific” drug
therapies in chronic inflammation). What will change for each disease
are the clinical manifestations (phenotypes) of the individual disease
classifications based on cellular, tissue, and organ system(s) involved.

A person's genes are what “predispose” them or provide genetic
susceptibility to dysregulate the immune system (e.g., “rogue B
cell—epitope spreading), which in turn yields chronic inflammation and,
in effect, creates the pathological damage to cells, tissues, and organ
systems synonymous with autoimmune diseases (there's yet another
“bouncing ball” process for you. Yes, I know. Getting old). The
environmental factors mentioned previously (e.g., smoking, pollution)
along with the inherited alleles that an individual possesses for a
specific gene (the genotype), combine to produce the “phenotype trigger”
and the clinical manifestations of the disease state. This genetic
approach to disease has led to the concept of “precision medicine” [22]
(described in Chapter 3 and discussed throughout Section 2 of this
book).

5.1. General signs and symptoms

Beyond signs and symptoms associated with chronic inflammation
(presented in Chapter 4), below is a listing of the nonspecific symptoms
most associated with autoimmune disease:

1.  • Fatigue;
2.  • Achy muscles;
3.  • Swelling and redness;
4.  • Low-grade fever;
5.  • Trouble concentrating;
6.  • Numbness and tingling in the hands and feet;
7.  • Hair loss;
8.  • Skin rashes.
9.  • Body pain;
10. • Fever (often diagnostically referred to as “fever of unknown
    origin” or FUO);
11. • Constant fatigue and insomnia;
12. • Depression, anxiety and mood disorders;
13. • Gastrointestinal complications like constipation, diarrhea, and
    acid reflux;
14. • Weight gain;
15. • Frequent infections.

5.2. Diagnosis of autoimmune disease

The diagnosis of autoimmune disease can be challenging for two reasons.
First, many of the associated diseases share similar symptoms. Second,
as described previously, the disease process may be organ-specific or
disseminated among multiple body systems. The diagnostic evaluation
includes a thorough history, physical examination, laboratory testing,
and imaging based on suspected tissue or organ-system involvement(s).
Any additional tests mentioned in the diagnosis of chronic inflammation
in Chapter 4 (page 84) should be considered part of an autoimmune
disease evaluation as well.

5.2.1. Physical examination

In autoimmune diseases, signs and symptoms can vary considerably. As
opposed to acute inflammation, chronic inflammation in autoimmune
diseases can be difficult to identify without a history of precipitating
acute inflammation. A chronically ill patient (chronic disease patient)
can be assumed to have chronic inflammation as well. (To state it once
again, “ … chronic inflammatory disease is the progenitor or originating
cause of all the major human disease categories.”) [23].

In the case of immunosuppression or immunocompromised disease
conditions, the symptoms are usually indirect as in increased illnesses,
risk of infection, blood disorders, digestive problems, and delayed
growth and development [24]. Regarding the array of autoimmune diseases,
there have been more than 80 identified and affecting more than 50
million Americans (according to the American Autoimmune Disease Related
Association, AARDA, 2019), 75% of whom are women [25] (for clarity, the
78% figure in the beginning of this chapter is an older 1997 US
statistic which might suggest a “slight” improvement in the prevalence
in women). Relative to the specific conditions, symptoms range from no
symptoms at all to general malaise to severe illness and risk of death
(similar to COVID-19 patients, particularly with obesity) [26].

5.2.2. Laboratory

No single laboratory test can diagnose autoimmune diseases. It requires
a physical examination to assess signs and symptoms with a combination
of lab tests. Antinuclear antibody (ANA) test identify antibodies that
can bind to a normal cell nucleus. Their assessment in a blood test is
often one of the first tests used when symptoms suggest an autoimmune
disease. A positive ANA test indicates the potential presence of
autoimmune disease (specific for SLE), but it does not confirm exactly
which one, or even if one is present for certain. Alternate tests look
for specific autoantibodies produced in certain autoimmune diseases. The
bottom line in laboratory diagnosis is nonspecific and can only assist
in the symptoms with other tests necessary to confirm the diagnosis
[27].

5.2.3. Imaging

Based on a tentative diagnosis of an autoimmune disease, there is a
likelihood that tissue(s) and organ(s) associated with the specific
disease will demonstrate identifiable pathology. Examples include
autoimmune respiratory diseases that will show distinct changes in lung
X-rays; gastrointestinal related diseases will demonstrate distinct
changes in endoscopic examinations; MS will reveal certain cerebral
changes (e.g., calcifications on MRI scans). The combination of positive
laboratory and imaging diagnostic indicators is all contributory, but
only in combination with a careful physical assessment and patient
history.

6. “Top 10” autoimmune diseases (clinical descriptions, diagnosis, and treatment options) [28,29]

Now, let's present some specific descriptions of the “top 10” autoimmune
diseases that we identify in Table 5.5. For each of the diseases, we
will include a brief description of their etiologies; clinical signs and
symptoms; diagnostic criteria; and finally, a listing of their
treatments, including the immunotherapeutic agents (with their generic
and brand names) used in their treatment. But please understand that
therapeutic agents are being developed, FDA approved, and marketed on
almost a monthly basis. As such, there will be additional drugs
developed after the publication of this book that are not included.
Details on any FDA approved (or experimental) drugs you might be
familiar with that are not listed in Table 5.4 should be available in
the online literature. Also, after this section we will revisit, in
greater depth, pharmacology and pharmacodynamics of the immunotherapies
mentioned in the treatment options for each of these top 10 autoimmune
diseases.

First, I would refer you back to Table 5.1 that lists some of the
diseases (38 of a total of about 80) associated with the autoimmune
response where you can begin to see the magnitude of this pathological
category. To further emphasize the extent and thus, the prevalence of
autoimmune diseases (approximately 8% of the general population [30]),
Table 5.5 lists the top 10 autoimmune diseases. I'm sure you will
recognize and note the “popularity” of each of these diseases in today's
world.

Now, as promised, I will present a brief clinical description,
diagnostic considerations and a listing of treatment options for each of
the “top 10.” And, please remember, in the interest of “saving trees”, I
will not be revisiting the immunological characteristics (molecular
biology and immunopathophysiology) for each of these autoimmune
diseases. Rather, simply remember that they all, directly and
indirectly, share the same immunology, chronic inflammatory mechanisms,
molecular biology, and genetics that we have been describing and
discussing up to this point throughout this book. Also, a large
percentage of the immunotherapeutic agents under each of the “Treatment”
sections in this “top 10” listing include medications (generic and brand
names) used for multiple disease categories (i.e., nonspecific therapies
as described throughout Chapters 4 and 5).

Table 5.4

  Brand name   Mechanism
  ------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Orencia      T-cell inhibitor
  Humira       TNF inhibitor
  Actemra      TNF inhibitor
  Azasan       Purine synthesis inhibitor
  Plaquenil    Suppression of IL-1 & TNF-α, induce apoptosis of inflammation cells & decrease chemotaxis
  Sandimmune   Calcineurin inhibitor
  Enbrel       TNF inhibitor
  Simponi      TNF inhibitor
  Remicade     TNF inhibitor
  Arava        Pyrimidine synthesis inhibitor
  Trexall      Purine metabolism inhibitor
  Minocin      5-LO inhibitor
  Rituxan      Monoclonal antibody
  Azulfidine   Suppression of IL-1 & TNF-α-

  : Examples of biologic immunopharmacotherapeutics.

Source: Louis J. Catania © 2022.

 

Table 5.5

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   1. Rheumatoid arthritis                                           |
| -   2. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)                             |
| -   3. Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)                               |
| -   4. Crohn's Disease                                                |
| -   5. Multiple sclerosis (MS)                                        |
| -   6. Type 1 diabetes mellitus                                       |
| -   7. Guillain-Barre syndrome                                        |
| -   8. Psoriasis                                                      |
| -   9. Graves' disease                                                |
| -   10. Myasthenia gravis                                             |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

: Ten (10) most common autoimmune diseases.

Source: Foundations of AI in Healthcare and Bioscience; Catania; Academy
Press. November 2020.

6.1. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)

Description: This is a relatively common (over 25 million effected),
long-term condition that primarily affects joints. It typically results
in warm, swollen, and painful joints, most commonly, the wrist and
hands, as well as multiple joints (polyarthritis) with the same joints
typically involved on both sides of the body. Symptoms present mostly in
the morning on waking or following prolonged inactivity. The disease may
also affect other parts of the body (i.e., multisystem) including
inflammation around the lungs and heart, cardiovascular disease,
osteoporosis, interstitial lung disease, infection, cancer, and
vasculitis in long-term disease. Often, symptoms come on gradually over
weeks to months. The cause of RA is believed to involve a combination of
genetic and environmental factors. The diagnosis is made mostly on the
basis of a person's signs and symptoms.

Diagnosis:

1.  • Difficult to diagnose in its early stages because early signs and
    symptoms mimic those of many other diseases;

2.  • Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, or sed rate);

3.  • C-reactive protein (CRP) that may indicate the presence of an
    inflammatory process in the body;

4.  • Rheumatoid factor and anticyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP)
    antibodies;

5.  • No one blood test or physical finding confirms the diagnosis.

6.  • Laboratory testing:

7.  1.  ○ Blood tests:

    2.  -   ○ Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, or sed rate);
        -   ○ C-reactive protein (CRP),
        -   ○ Rheumatoid factor;
        -   ○ Anticyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibodies.

    3.  • Imaging test

Treatment:

1.  • Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs):

2.  -   ○ Over-the-counter NSAIDs;
    -   
    -   ○ Stronger NSAIDs are available by prescription;
    -   ○ Side effects may include stomach irritation, heart problems
        and kidney damage.

3.  • Corticosteroid medications:

4.  -   ○ Prednisone;
    -   ○ Methylprednisolone (Medrol)
    -   ○ Dexamethasone;
    -   ○ Side effects may include thinning of bones, weight gain and
        diabetes.

5.  • Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs):

6.  -   ○ Methotrexate (Trexall, Otrexup, others);
    -   ○ Leflunomide (Arava);
    -   ○ Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil);
    -   ○ Sulfasalazine (Azulfidine);
    -   ○ Side effects vary but may include liver damage, bone marrow
        suppression, and severe lung infections.

7.  • Biologic agents (newer class of DMARDs):

8.  -   ○ Abatacept (Orencia);
    -   ○ Adalimumab (Humira);
    -   ○ Anakinra (Kineret);
    -   ○ Baricitinib (Olumiant);
    -   ○ Certolizumab (Cimzia);
    -   ○ Etanercept (Enbrel);
    -   ○ Golimumab (Simponi);
    -   ○ Infliximab (Remicade);
    -   ○ Rituximab (Rituxan);
    -   ○ Sarilumab (Kevzara);
    -   ○ Tocilizumab (Actemra);
    -   ○ Tofacitinib (Xeljanz);
    -   ○ Biologic drugs increase the risk of infections;
    -   ○ Higher doses of Tofacitinib can increase the risk of blood
        clots in the lungs;
    -   ○ Biologic (DMARDs) are usually most effective when paired with
        a nonbiologic DMARD, such as methotrexate.

9.  • Surgery

10. -   ○ Synovectomy: Surgery to remove the inflamed lining of the
        joint (synovium) can be performed on knees, elbows, wrists,
        fingers, and hips;
    -   ○ Tendon repair: Inflammation and joint damage may cause tendons
        around your joint to loosen or rupture. Your surgeon may be able
        to repair the tendons around your joint;
    -   ○ Joint fusion: Surgically fusing a joint may be recommended to
        stabilize or realign a joint and for pain relief when a joint
        replacement isn't an option;
    -   
    -   ○ Total joint replacement: During joint replacement surgery,
        your surgeon removes the damaged parts of your joint and inserts
        a prosthesis made of metal and plastic;

6.2. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)

Description: This is the quintessential, multisystem, diffuse autoimmune
disease attacking healthy tissue and organ systems in many parts of the
body. It is known as “the great imitator” (also an idiom for syphilis
but no actual or implied association with SLE) because it often mimics
or is mistaken for so many other illnesses. Symptoms vary from mild to
severe including painful and swollen joints (less severe than RA),
fever, chest pain, mouth ulcers, swollen lymph nodes, feeling tired, and
a red rash (up to 70%) that is more common on the face. Cardiovascular
complications include perivasculitis, myocarditis and endocarditis, and
mitral valve or tricuspid valve involvement. There is a pattern of
periods of illness (flares), and periods of remission with few symptoms.
Women of childbearing age are affected about nine times more often than
men. (Theories on reasons for this strong gender predilection are
covered on page 95.) While it is considered a hereditary disorder that
most commonly begins between the ages of 15 and 45, a wide range of ages
are affected. The immunopathology involves an adaptive immune response
by autoantibodies, most commonly antinuclear antibodies that are the
strongest diagnostic sign of the disease. Life expectancy is lower among
SLE patients due to the significant increased risk of cardiovascular
disease, with that being the most common cause of death.

Diagnosis: (Really “classification” vs. diagnosis: where four or more
criteria are required):

1.  • Malar rash;

2.  • Discoid rash;

3.  • Photosensitivity (development of a rash after sun exposure);

4.  • Oral or nasal ulcers; arthritis of multiple joints; serositis
    (inflammation of the lining around the lungs or heart);

5.  • Kidney disease indicated by protein or casts in the urine;

6.  • Neurological disorders such as seizures and psychosis;

7.  • Blood disorders such as hemolytic anemia, leukopenia, and
    lymphopenia;

8.  • Hair loss or breaking, especially around the forehead; and

9.  • Raynaud's Phenomenon, a two- or three-color change of the
    fingertips upon cold exposure.

10. • Diagnostic testing:

11. -   ○ Laboratory tests

12. • Complete blood count (CBC);

13. • Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR);

14. • Kidney and liver assessment;

15. 

16. • Urinalysis;

17. • Antinuclear antibody (ANA) test.

18. -   ○ Imaging tests

19. • Chest X-ray;

20. • Echocardiogram.

21. -   ○ Biopsy

Treatment

1.  • Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs):

2.  -   ○ Over-the-counter NSAIDs;
    -   ○ Stronger NSAIDs are available by prescription;
    -   ○ Side effects may include stomach irritation, heart problems
        and kidney damage.

3.  • Antimalarial drugs:

4.  -   ○ Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil);

5.  • Corticosteroids;

6.  -   ○ Prednisone;
    -   ○ Methylprednisolone (Medrol);
    -   ○ Dexamethasone.

7.  • Immunosuppressants.

8.  -   ○ Azathioprine (Imuran, Azasan);
    -   ○ Mycophenolate (Cellcept);
    -   ○ Methotrexate (Trexall, Xatmep, others);
    -   ○ Cyclosporine (Sandimmune, Neoral, Gengraf);
    -   ○ Leflunomide (Arava).

9.  • Biologics:

10. -   ○ Belimumab (Benlysta) administered intravenously;
    -   ○ Rituximab (Rituxan, Truxima).

6.3. Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)

Description: This is a group of autoimmune inflammatory conditions of
the colon and small intestine, thus an organ specific disease. It
includes ulcerative colitis (UC) and, in some classifications, Crohn's
disease (below). Symptoms include abdominal pain, diarrhea, rectal
bleeding, severe internal cramps/muscle spasms in the region of the
pelvis and weight loss. The diagnosis is generally made by assessment of
inflammatory biomarkers in the stool followed by colonoscopy with biopsy
for pathological lesions (also associated with UC). Etiology is believed
to be interaction of environmental and genetic factors leading to
immunological responses and inflammation in the intestine. Microbial
symbiosis and immune factors produce alterations in the gut microbiome
contributing to inflammatory gut diseases. IBD-affected individuals have
been found to have 30%–50% reduced biodiversity of commensal bacteria in
their gut. A genetic component to IBD has been clearly recognized for
years through research and genetic sequencing of ethnic groups (e.g.,
Ashkenazi Jews), familial clustering, epidemiological studies, and twin
studies.

Diagnosis:

Laboratory tests:

1.  • Tests for anemia or infection;
2.  • Stool studies;

Endoscopy:

1.  • Colonoscopy;
2.  • Flexible sigmoidoscopy;
3.  • Upper endoscopy;
4.  • Capsule endoscopy;
5.  • Balloon-assisted enteroscopy.

Imaging procedures:

1.  • X-ray;
2.  • Computerized tomography (CT) scan;
3.  • CT enterography (provides better images of the small bowel);
4.  • Barium X-rays;
5.  • Capsule endoscopy;
6.  • Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

Treatment:

Antiinflammatory drugs:

1.  • Corticosteroids;
2.  • Aminosalicylates, such as mesalamine (Asacol HD, Delzicol,
    others);
3.  • Balsalazide (Colazal);
4.  • Olsalazine (Dipentum).

Immunosuppressants:

1.  • Azathioprine (Azasan, Imuran);
2.  • Mercaptopurine (Purinethol, Purixan);
3.  • Methotrexate (Trexall).

Biologics:

1.  • Infliximab (Remicade);
2.  • Adalimumab (Humira);
3.  • Golimumab (Simponi);
4.  • Certolizumab (Cimzia);
5.  • Vedolizumab (Entyvio);
6.  • Ustekinumab (Stelara).

Antibiotics:

1.  • Ciprofloxacin (Cipro);
2.  • Metronidazole (Flagyl).

Antidiarrheal medications.

Pain relievers.

Vitamins and supplements.

Nutritional support.

Surgery.

6.4. Crohn's disease (CD)

Description: This is a type of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) with the
most prominent distinction being its effect on any segment of the
gastrointestinal tract from the mouth to the anus. Considering that all
those structures and tissues are part of the gastrointestinal tract,
Crohn's is considered an organ-specific disease although it is known to
produce anemia, skin rashes, arthritis, inflammation of the eye, and
fatigue. Its etiology includes a combination of environmental, immune,
and bacterial factors in genetically susceptible individuals (more than
70 genes having been found to be involved). Abdominal pain is the
hallmark initial symptom of Crohn's disease, especially in the lower
right abdomen. It is often accompanied by diarrhea, that may or may not
be bloody. Flatulence, bloating, and abdominal distension are additional
symptoms and add to the intestinal discomfort. As with other autoimmune
diseases, there is no cure for Crohn's but increasing amounts of
immunotherapeutics are showing promise (discussed below). Males and
females are equally affected and the rate of the disease seems to be
increasing since 1970. Many people with Crohn's disease have symptoms
for years before the diagnosis. The usual onset is in the teens and
twenties, but can occur at any age. People with Crohn's disease
experience chronic recurring periods of flare-ups and remission. Crohn's
disease seems to be due to a combination of environmental factors and
genetic predisposition. It is the first genetically complex disease in
which the relationship between genetic risk factors and the immune
system is understood in considerable detail. Some new research is
suggesting that this autoimmune disease may be associated more directly
with the innate versus the adaptive immune system through impaired
cytokine secretion by macrophages and/or an overactive T_(H) function.

Diagnosis: Same as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).

Treatment: Same as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).

6.5. Multiple sclerosis (MS)

Description: Also known as encephalomyelitis disseminata, MS is a
demyelinating disease in which the insulating covers of nerve cells in
the brain and spinal cord are damaged, disrupting the ability of parts
of the nervous system to transmit signals. The results are physical,
mental, and sometimes psychiatric problems with specific symptoms to
include almost any neurological symptom or sign, with autonomic, motor,
sensory problems and particularly vision signs, most common being double
vision, blurring and blindness in one eye (secondary to optic neuritis),
muscle weakness and trouble with sensation or coordination. In that MS
can affect nerves in any part of the body and the organs they innervate,
we can consider it a diffuse, multisystem disorder (including in
children as multisystem inflammation syndrome in children or MIS-C) [].
The course of symptoms occurs in two main patterns initially: either as
episodes of sudden worsening that last a few days to months (called
relapses, exacerbations, bouts, attacks, or flare-ups) followed by
improvement (85% of cases) or as a gradual worsening over time without
periods of recovery (10%–15% of cases). The cause of MS is unknown, but
some combination of genetic and environmental factors such as infectious
agents is suspected. It has an odd distribution with a strong prevalence
in northern European countries and other worldwide geographic pockets
with no incidence at all. This phenomenon may relate to the postulated
infectious agent (e.g., virus) etiology.

Diagnosis:

1.  • Blood tests;
2.  • Spinal tap (lumbar puncture);
3.  • MRI;
4.  • Evoked potential tests.

Treatment:

1.  • Corticosteroids:

2.  -   ○ Oral prednisone;
    -   ○ Intravenous methylprednisolone.

3.  • Plasma exchange (plasmapheresis)

4.  • Injectable treatments include

5.  -   ○ Interferon beta medications;
    -   ○ Glatiramer acetate (Copaxone, Glatopa).

6.  • Oral treatments:

7.  -   ○ Fingolimod (Gilenya);
    -   ○ Dimethyl fumarate (Tecfidera);
    -   ○ Diroximel fumarate (Vumerity);
    -   
    -   ○ Teriflunomide (Aubagio);
    -   ○ Siponimod (Mayzent);
    -   ○ Cladribine (Mavenclad).

6.6. Type 1 diabetes [31]

Description: Previously known as juvenile diabetes, Type 1 diabetes is a
form of diabetes in which very little or no insulin is produced by the
islets of Langerhans in the pancreas. It makes up an estimated 5%–10% of
all diabetes cases and typically begins in children and young adults.
Insulin is a hormone required for the body to use blood sugar and thus
its absence or reduction produces high blood sugar levels. It is
believed to involve a combination of over 50 genes and environmental
factors and its underlying mechanism involves an autoimmune destruction
of the insulin producing beta cells in the pancreas. The classic
symptoms of Type 1 diabetes include polyuria (increased urination),
polydipsia (increased thirst), dry mouth, polyphagia (increased hunger),
fatigue, and weight loss. It is often diagnosed when diabetic
ketoacidosis occurs (rapid deep breathing, drowsiness, increased thirst,
frequent urination, abdominal pain, and vomiting).

Diagnosis:

1.  • Fasting plasma glucose level at or above 7.0mmol/L (126mg/dL);
2.  • Symptoms of hyperglycemia and casual plasma glucose at or above
    11.1mmol/L (200mg/dL);
3.  • Glycated hemoglobin (hemoglobin A1C) at or above 48mmol/mol (≥6.5
    DCCT %);
4.  • Appearance of diabetes-related autoantibodies.

Treatment:

1.  • Taking insulin (lifelong requirement);
2.  • Carbohydrate, fat, and protein counting;
3.  • Frequent blood sugar monitoring;
4.  • Eating healthy foods;
5.  • Exercising regularly and maintaining a healthy weight;

Medications:

1.  • High blood pressure medications:

2.  -   ○ Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors;
    -   ○ Angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs);

3.  • Aspirin;

4.  • Cholesterol-lowering drugs with the following therapeutic
    criteria:

5.  -   ○ Low-density lipoprotein (LDL, or “bad”) cholesterol be below
        100mg/dL (2.6mmol/L);
    -   
    -   ○ High-density lipoprotein (HDL, or “good”) cholesterol is
        recommended to be over 50mg/dL (1.3mmol/L) in women and over
        40mg/dL (1mmol/L) in men;
    -   ○ Triglycerides, another type of blood fat, ideal when they're
        less than 150mg/dL (1.7mmol/L).

6.  • Blood sugar monitoring

7.  • Healthy eating and monitoring carbohydrates

8.  -   ○ Fruits
    -   ○ Vegetables
    -   ○ Whole grains

9.  • Physical activity

10. • Potential future treatments

11. -   ○ Pancreas transplant;
    -   ○ Islet stem cell transplantation (see Section 8.1 below).

6.7. Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS)

Description: The immune system attacks the peripheral nervous system,
the network of nerves located outside of the brain and spinal cord. It
can range from a very mild case with brief weakness to nearly
devastating paralysis, leaving the person unable to breathe
independently. Fortunately, most people eventually recover from even the
most severe cases of GBS. After recovery, some people will continue to
have some degree of weakness. Unexplained sensations often occur first,
such as tingling in the feet or hands, or even pain (especially in
children), often starting in the legs or back. These sensations tend to
disappear before the major, longer-term symptoms appear. Symptoms often
affect the arms, breathing muscles, and even the face, reflecting more
widespread nerve damage. Most people reach the greatest stage of
weakness within the first 2weeks after symptoms appear; by the third
week 90% of affected individuals are at their weakest.

Diagnosis:

1.  • Symptoms appear rapidly on both sides of the body (the typical
    finding in Guillain-Barré syndrome) and the speed with which the
    symptoms appear
2.  • Deep tendon reflexes in the legs, such as knee jerks, are usually
    lost;
3.  • Reflexes may also be absent in the arms;
4.  • Spinal tap (lumbar puncture) produces cerebrospinal fluid with
    more protein than usual but very few immune cells.

Treatment:

1.  • Plasma exchange (plasmapheresis);
2.  • Immunoglobulin therapy.

6.8. Psoriasis

Description: Skin disorder that causes skin cells to multiply up to 10
times faster than normal. This makes the skin build up into bumpy red
patches covered with white scales. It is not contagious. It usually
appears in early adulthood and generally affects just a few areas. In
severe cases, psoriasis can cover large parts of the body. The patches
can heal and then come back throughout a person's life. Some common
symptoms for plaque psoriasis, the most common form, include red skin,
often covered with silver-colored scales. The plaques may be itchy and
painful, and they sometimes crack and bleed. In severe cases, the
plaques will grow and merge, covering large areas. Common sites include
plaques of scales or crust on the scalp, fingernails and toenails,
including discoloration and pitting of the nails and may also crumble or
detach from the nail bed. Patients with psoriasis can also get a type of
arthritis called psoriatic arthritis with pain and swelling in the
joints. The condition is an unknown autoimmune disease with a tendency
to be a familial trait, although it may skip generations.

Diagnosis:

1.  • History and physical examination of the plaques.

Treatment:

Topical therapy (creams and ointments):

1.  • Corticosteroids:

2.  -   ○ Hydrocortisone
    -   ○ Triamcinolone (Acetonide, Trianex);
    -   ○ Clobetasol (Temovate).

3.  • Methotrexate:

4.  -   ○ (Trexall)
    -   ○ Adalimumab (Humira)
    -   ○ Infliximab (Remicade).

5.  • Cyclosporine.

6.  • Biologics:

7.  -   ○ Etanercept (Enbrel);
    -   ○ Infliximab (Remicade);
    -   ○ Adalimumab (Humira);
    -   ○ Ustekinumab (Stelara);
    -   ○ Secukinumab (Cosentyx);
    -   ○ Ixekizumab (Taltz).

8.  • Other medications:

9.  -   ○ Thioguanine (Tabloid);
    -   ○ Hydroxyurea (Droxia, Hydrea);
    -   ○ Apremilast (Otezla).

10. • Vitamin D analogues;

11. -   ○ Calcipotriene;
    -   ○ Calcitriol (Vectical).

12. • Retinoids;

13. -   ○ Tazarotene (Tazorac, Avage);
    -   ○ Acitretin (Soriatane).

14. • Calcineurin inhibitors;

15. -   ○ Tacrolimus (Protopic);
    -   ○ Pimecrolimus (Elidel).

16. • Salicylic acid.

17. • Coal tar:

18. -   ○ Goeckerman therapy. Coal tar treatment with UVB light therapy;
    -   ○ Anthralin.

19. • Light therapy

20. -   ○ Sunlight.
    -   ○ UVB broadband.
    -   ○ UVB narrowband.
    -   ○ Psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA).
    -   ○ Excimer laser. Oral or injected medications

21. • Alternative medicine:

22. -   ○ Aloe extract cream;
    -   ○ Fish oil supplements;
    -   ○ Oregon grape;
    -   ○ Essential oils.

6.9. Graves' disease

Description: This is an immune system disorder that results in the
overproduction of thyroid hormones (hyperthyroidism). It is the most
common cause of hyperthyroidism. Thyroid hormones affect many body
systems, so signs and symptoms of Graves' disease can be wide ranging.
Although it may affect anyone, it's more common among women and in
people younger than age 40. The antibody associated with Graves'
disease, thyrotropin receptor antibody (TRAb), acts like the regulatory
pituitary hormone. That means that TRAb overrides the normal regulation
of the thyroid, causing an overproduction of thyroid hormones
(hyperthyroidism).

Diagnosis:

1.  • Anxiety and irritability;
2.  • A fine tremor of the hands or fingers;
3.  • Heat sensitivity and an increase in perspiration or warm, moist
    skin;
4.  • Weight loss, despite normal eating habits;
5.  • Enlargement of the thyroid gland (goiter);
6.  • Change in menstrual cycles;
7.  
8.  • Erectile dysfunction or reduced libido;
9.  • Frequent bowel movements;
10. • Bulging eyes (Graves' ophthalmopathy—25% to 50%);
11. • Fatigue;
12. • Thick, red skin usually on the shins or tops of the feet (Graves'
    dermopathy);
13. • Rapid or irregular heartbeat (palpitations);
14. • Sleep disturbance.

Laboratory tests:

1.  • Graves' Disease Blood Tests.
2.  • Testing TSH Levels;
3.  • Testing Total T3 and T4 Hormone Levels;
4.  • Testing Free T4 Hormone Levels;
5.  • Testing Thyroid Peroxidase Antibodies (TPO) Level;
6.  • Radioactive Iodine Uptake (RAIU) and Scan;
7.  • Ultrasound;
8.  • Image testing.

Treatment:

1.  • Radioactive iodine therapy;

2.  • Antithyroid medications:

3.  -   ○ Propylthiouracil;
    -   ○ Methimazole (Tapazole).

4.  • Beta blockers include

5.  -   ○ Propranolol (Inderal, InnoPran XL);
    -   ○ Atenolol (Tenormin);
    -   ○ Metoprolol (Lopressor, Toprol-XL);
    -   ○ Nadolol (Corgard).

6.  • Surgery:

7.  -   ○ Thyroidectomy;
    -   ○ Subtotal thyroidectomy

8.  • Treating Graves' ophthalmopathy

9.  -   ○ Teprotumumab (Tepezza);
    -   ○ Prisms (for double vision);
    -   ○ Orbital decompression surgery;
    -   ○ Orbital radiotherapy.

6.10. Myasthenia gravis (MG)

Description: This disease is characterized by weakness and rapid fatigue
of any of the muscles under your voluntary control. It's caused by a
breakdown in the normal communication between nerves and muscles.
Symptoms include weakness of arm or leg muscles, double vision, drooping
eyelids, and difficulties with speech, chewing, swallowing and
breathing. Though the disease can affect people of any age,
interestingly it's more common in women younger than 40 and in men older
than 60. Symptoms tend to progress over time, usually reaching their
worst within a few years after the onset of the disease.

Diagnosis:

Neurological examination:

1.  • Reflexes;
2.  • Muscle strength;
3.  • Muscle tone;
4.  • Senses of touch and sight;
5.  • Coordination;
6.  • Balance;
7.  • Edrophonium test: Injection of the chemical edrophonium chloride
    that results in a sudden, temporary improvement in muscle strength;
8.  • Blood analysis;
9.  • Repetitive nerve stimulation:
10. • Single-fiber electromyography (EMG);
11. • Imaging (CT scan and MRI);
12. • Pulmonary function tests.

Treatment:

Medications

1.  • Cholinesterase inhibitors;

2.  -   ○ Pyridostigmine (Mestinon, Regonal);
    -   ○ Neostigmine (Bloxiverz).

3.  • Corticosteroids;

4.  • Immunosuppressants;

5.  -   ○ Azathioprine (Azasan, Imuran);
    -   ○ Mycophenolate mofetil (Cellcept);
    -   ○ Cyclosporine (Sandimmune);
    -   ○ Methotrexate (Trexall);
    -   ○ Tacrolimus (Astrograf XL, Prograf).

6.  • Intravenous therapy:

7.  -   ○ Plasmapheresis;
    -   ○ Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg);
    -   ○ Monoclonal antibody:
    -   ○ Rituximab (Rituxan);
    -   ○ Eculizumab (Soliris).

8.  • Surgery:

9.  -   ○ Video-assisted thymectomy;
    -   ○ Robot-assisted thymectomy.

7. General therapeutics considerations with autoimmune diseases

Now, let's discuss the pharmacology and pharmacodynamics of the
immunotherapy drugs (most listed above under the specific conditions for
which they are used) and immunotherapeutic procedures. As we have
discussed and emphasized numerous times, chronic inflammation and
autoimmune diseases often require treatment directed at the tissue(s)
and organ system(s) or more generalized treatment falling under the
categories of immunosuppressive and immunomodulating (suppressing or
stimulating) therapies, sometimes referred to as “nonspecific
therapies.” Because of the parallel nature of chronic inflammation and
autoimmune disease, as we have elaborated on in these previous 2
chapters, we included a listing of the therapeutic options in Table 5.4
(page 112). Now it's time to “go deeper” on their mechanisms and usage.

7.1. Immunotherapies

Some of the organ/tissue-specific treatments and procedures for
autoimmune diseases are delivered as targeted strategies directed to the
effected organs (e.g., antithyroid medications for Grave's disease) or
tissues (e.g., topical corticosteroids for psoriasis). In the case of
diffuse/multisystem autoimmune conditions (including diabetes and
cancers), the more generalized treatments (the “non-specific therapies”)
are classified as immunosuppressive and immunomodulating (suppressing or
stimulating) therapies. These immunotherapeutics (i.e., pharmacologic
immunomodulation) target the cellular, biochemical and molecular
biological processes occurring in chronic inflammation as discussed in
the section on pharmacodynamics in Chapter 4 (page 77). A comprehensive
list of immunotherapeutic medication options (Table 5.6) includes most
of the current drugs used for chronic inflammation, autoimmune diseases,
and cancers.

Table 4.2 (back in Chapter 4, page 79) is a limited list of
pharmacologic, proinflammatory mediators (and their actions) used to
immunomodulate the mechanisms that drive the pharmacodynamics of chronic
inflammation. The basis of medical therapies for autoimmune diseases
(and again, chronic inflammation) to elicit desired therapeutic effects
is the immunomodulation (amplifications, supplementation, suppression)
of the chemical and molecular components identified in the right-hand
column of Fig. 2.3. (I know I'm getting deeper as I warned would be the
case in this section. But I promise to try to keep it “simple … but not
simpler.”)

On the left side of Fig. 2.3 are the pharmacologic pathways,
cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase, most responsible for acute
inflammation. The nonspecific drugs used for these pathways in acute
inflammation include corticosteroids and NSAIDs (discussed in Chapter 2,
page 36). These drugs are of some value in chronic inflammation and
autoimmune diseases as well, where they suppress the immune system's
molecular (cellular and humoral) biology. They rarely prove totally
adequate for maximal therapy, although the corticosteroids do suppress
advanced inflammatory damage as has been demonstrated (with
dexamethasone) in their effectiveness for late stage COVID-19 (more in
Chapter 7). Rather, the principal approach in treating chronic
inflammation is obviously to suppress those immunochemical and molecular
biologic processes (right side of Fig. 2.3) that are promoting
inflammatory (proinflammatory cytokine) changes and conversely, to
stimulate and promote those agents that inhibit the inflammatory process
(see Table 4.2 from Chapter 4, page 79).

Table 5.6

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 1.  • Abatacept (Orencia)         | 1.  • Leflunomide (Arava)         |
| 2.  • Adalimumab (Humira)         | 2.  • Mercaptopurine (Purinethol, |
| 3.  • Aminosalicylates,           |     Purixan)                      |
| 4.  • Anakinra (Kineret)          | 3.  • Mesalamine (Asacol HD,      |
| 5.  • Apremilast (Otezla)         |     Delzicol)                     |
| 6.  • Atenolol (Tenormin)         | 4.  • Methimazole (Tapazole)      |
| 7.  • Atezolizumab (Tecentriq)    | 5.  • Methotrexate (Trexall,      |
| 8.  • Avelumab (Bavencio)         |     Otrexup)                      |
| 9.  • Azathioprine (Azasan,       | 6.  • Methylprednisolone (Medrol) |
|     Imuran)                       | 7.  • Metoprolol (Lopressor,      |
| 10. • Balsalazide (Colazal)       |     Toprol-XL)                    |
| 11. • Baricitinib (Olumiant)      | 8.  • Mycophenolate (Cellcept)    |
| 12. • Belimumab (Benlysta)        | 9.  • Nadolol (Corgard)           |
| 13. • Blinatumomab                | 10. • Neostigmine (Bloxiverz)     |
| 14. • Cemiplimab (Libtayo)        | 11. • Nivolumab (Opdivo)          |
| 15. • Certolizumab (Cimzia)       | 12. • Olsalazine (Dipentum)       |
| 16. • Cladribine (Mavenclad)      | 13. • Pembrolizumab (Keytruda)    |
| 17. • Clobetasol (Temovate)       | 14. • Prednisone                  |
| 18. • Corticosteroids             | 15. • Propranolol (Inderal,       |
| 19. • Cyclosporine(Sandimmune,    |     InnoPran XL)                  |
|     Neoral, Gengral)              | 16. • Propylthiouracil            |
| 20. • Dexamethasone               | 17. • Pyridostigmine (Mestinon,   |
| 21. • Dimethyl fumarate           |     Regonal)                      |
|     (Tecfidera)                   | 18. • Rituximab (Rituxan,         |
| 22. • Diroximel fumarate          |     Truxima)                      |
|     (Vumerity)                    | 19. • Sarilumab (Kevzara)         |
| 23. • Durvalumab (Imfinzi)        | 20. • Secukinumab (Cosentyx)      |
| 24. • Eculizumab (Soliris)        | 21. • Siponimod (Mayzent)         |
| 25. • Etanercept (Enbrel)         | 22. • Sulfasalazine (Azulfidine)  |
| 26. • Fingolimod (Gilenya)        | 23. • Tacrolimus (Astrograf XL,   |
| 27. • Glatiramer acetate          |     Prograf)                      |
|     (Copaxone, Glatopa).          | 24. • Teprotumumab (Tepezza)      |
| 28. • Golimumab (Simponi)         | 25. • Teriflunomide (Aubagio)     |
| 29. • Hydroxychloroquine          | 26. • Thioguanine (Tabloid)       |
|     (Plaquenil)                   | 27. • Tocilizumab (Actemra)       |
| 30. • Hydroxyurea (Droxia,        | 28. • Tofacitinib (Xeljanz)       |
|     Hydrea)                       | 29. • Topoisomerase inhibitors    |
| 31. • Infliximab (Remicade)       | 30. • Triamcinolone (Acetonide,   |
| 32. • Ipilimumab (Yervoy)         |     Trianex)                      |
| 33. • Ixekizumab (Taltz)          | 31. • Ustekinumab (Stelara)       |
|                                   | 32. • Vedolizumab (Entyvio)       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

: Immunotherapeutic medication options for chronic inflammation,
autoimmune diseases and cancers (Generic and brand names/… mab
suffix=monoclonal antibody).

[image]

7.2. Monoclonal antibodies [32]

(Please note here that additional discussions on monoclonal antibodies
appear in Chapter 2, page 39; Chapter 5, page 128; Chapter 6, page 163;
and Chapter 7, page 200. I would say that this suggests the importance
and potential value of monoclonal antibodies in immunologic diseases
[and beyond].)

In some cases, immunotherapeutic drugs are used for multiple purposes
and sometimes the actual cells and chemicals (humoral agents) involved
in a bodily process are used to supplement the body's own defense
mechanisms. As an example, monoclonal antibodies (any drug with the
suffix, “… mab” in the generic name—list included as Table 5.7) are
laboratory antibodies (or actual patients' antibodies) engineered and
used to mimic the immune system's own antibody response to a specific
antigen and its potential resultant chronic inflammation. These
antibodies are made by identical immune cells that are all clones of a
unique parent cell. Another example of cellular and humoral bodily
agents used as immunotherapeutics include cocnvalescent plasma (to be
discussed in Chapter 7).

Monoclonal antibodies, also referred to as biologics, are immune system
proteins that are created in the lab. Antibodies are produced naturally
by your body (cellular, humoral, antibodies, etc.) and help the immune
system recognize germs that cause disease, such as bacteria and viruses,
and mark them for destruction (all the processes from Chapters 1 and 2).
Like your body's own antibodies, monoclonal antibodies recognize
specific targets. They are often generated by isolating or transforming
antibody-producing cells taken directly from immunized animals or
patients, and transplanting the antibody-encoding genes (see Chapter 1,
page 16) of these cells into suitable producer cell lines, rather than
using hybridoma technology (method for producing large amounts of
identical antibodies). Rather than wait for the body to make its own
antibodies, scientists are studying versions of these molecules to
directly disable the antigen.

Table 5.7

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 1.  • Adalimumab (Humira)         | 1.  • Ipilimumab (Yervoy)         |
| 2.  • Atezolizumab (Tecentriq)    | 2.  • Ixekizumab (Taltz)          |
| 3.  • Avelumab (Bavencio)         | 3.  • Nivolumab (Opdivo)          |
| 4.  • Belimumab (Benlysta)        | 4.  • Pembrolizumab (Keytruda)    |
| 5.  • Blinatumomab                | 5.  • Rituximab (Rituxan,         |
| 6.  • Cemiplimab (Libtayo)        |     Truxima)                      |
| 7.  • Certolizumab (Cimzia)       | 6.  • Sarilumab (Kevzara)         |
| 8.  • Durvalumab (Imfinzi)        | 7.  • Secukinumab (Cosentyx)      |
| 9.  • Eculizumab (Soliris)        | 8.  • Teprotumumab (Tepezza)      |
| 10. • Golimumab (Simponi)         | 9.  • Tocilizumab (Actemra)       |
| 11. • Infliximab (Remicade)       | 10. • Ustekinumab (Stelara)       |
|                                   | 11. • Vedolizumab (Entyvio)       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

: Monoclonal antibody options (generic and brand names).

[image]

Along with other outstanding researchers, Dr. Anthony Fauci identified
antibodies on B cells that could make endless copies of itself. These
“cloned” monoclonal antibodies could then be categorized by which
antibodies responded to which antigens (pathogens, carcinogens, etc.).
From this information, drugs were designed with specific types of
monoclonal antibodies that would attack an identified antigen. These
drugs have become a dominant immunotherapeutic medical treatment for a
vast number of diseases including the autoimmune diseases, cancers and
COVID-19, all to be discussed further in Chapter 6 (cancers) and 7
(COVID-19). This accomplishment by Dr. Fauci and his team has changed
the face of health care as monoclonal antibodies have revolutionized
disease care in the 21st century and have become the successful therapy
and drug of choice in early COVID-19 patients.

7.3. Biologics [33]

Beyond monoclonal antibody drugs, a second category of immunomodulating
drugs, in the immunosuppressive category is a group termed “ DMARDs,”
disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs [34]. These include such drugs as
hydroxychloroquine (you've heard of that one, I'm sure!), methotrexate,
sulfasalazine, and leflunomide. Second are the “biologic drugs” [35] (a
generic term) that are a category attempting to regulate (increase or
decrease) the immune response. These biologics are nonspecific (or
generic) for the range of diseases produced from chronic inflammation
and act on the immunopharmacology to biochemically inhibit
proinflammatory agents or promote inhibitory agents (Table 5.7). Among
these biologics are a large number of drug options (particularly the
monoclonals) including Tocilizumab, Etanercept, Adalimumab, Abatacept,
and many others presented in the discussions above on treatment of
specific autoimmune diseases with their immunomodulating mechanisms.

Some more of the popular nonspecific immunotherapeutic agents include
cytokines like interferons; interleukins; anti-TNFs (tumor necrosis
factor [e.g., tocilizumab and abatacept], a strong proinflammatory
cytokine that promotes apoptosis or cell-death, thus engendering
malignant cell death and that of overly active immune cells); gene-based
delivery systems; and other immune system modulators. Of course, as with
corticosteroids and any immunosuppressive agents, the risk of secondary
infection must always be considered (see the rationale for such risk in
Chapter 2, page 36) and, if identified, must be treated with appropriate
antibiotics. I specifically mention tocilizumab (Actemra) and abatacept
(Orencia) above because this secondary infectious risk has been shown to
be elevated in these TNF inhibitors. However, let's not “throw the baby
out with the bathwater” (yes, I know, another trite saying), in that one
of these monoclonal antibody TNF inhibitors, tocilizumab, is showing
promise for cancer therapies while conversely, abatacept is getting some
great reviews in the literature for effectiveness against COVID-19 and
cancers.

Checkpoint inhibitors [36] are monoclonal antibody drugs that target and
attach to PD-1, PD-L1, and CTLA-4 proteins on T cells (and some cancer
cells). This binding action can inhibit the proteins and boost the
immune response against cancer cells (more on this in Chapter 6 on
Cancer). These drugs are given intravenously and have been shown to be
helpful in treating several types of cancers with new cancer types being
added as more studies show the drugs to be effective. Examples of drugs
that target PD-1 include Pembrolizumab (Keytruda), Nivolumab (Opdivo),
and Cemiplimab (Libtayo). PD-L1 drugs include Atezolizumab (Tecentriq),
Avelumab (Bavencio) and Durvalumab (Imfinzi). Ipilimumab (Yervoy) is a
CTLA-4 checkpoint inhibitor and is used specifically to treat skin
melanoma. Some common side effects of checkpoint inhibitors include
diarrhea, pneumonitis (inflammation in the lungs), rashes and itchiness,
problems with some hormone levels, and kidney infections. Again, more on
the mechanics of checkpoint inhibitors in Chapter 6, Cancers.

The reason for the large variety of immunotherapeutic drugs is due to
the extensive diversity of proinflammatory mediators in the chronic
inflammatory and autoimmune process. To wit, research in
immunotherapeutic drugs reaches back into the chemistry of the innate
immune system as well. Researchers have found a new way to treat the
inflammation involved in chronic diseases such as psoriasis, asthma, and
HIV. A group of transmitter substances (cytokines) in the immune system,
the so-called IL-1 family in the innate immune system (see Chapters 1
and 2), has been shown to play an important role in many of these
diseases by regulating APCs and the body's immune responses [37].

While the biologics include a large number of drug options, all are
attempting to regulate (increase or decrease) the immune response. Each
has a distinct biochemical effect on different mediators. This gives
treating physicians the ability to get a maximal drug effect (and
sometimes a definitive diagnosis) by “experimenting” with response(s) to
a variety of biologics. Based on elevated or reduced blood levels of
cytokines, specific proteins, WBCs, etc., one biologic may produce a
better (or lesser) effect than another and sometimes, even reveal the
nature of an otherwise undetermined condition. This also confuses the
hell out of the public (especially those using a biologic) when they
watch a TV commercial promoting a biologic drug for a specific
autoimmune condition (e.g., RA) on one station. Then they change
channels and see the same drug being promoted for an entirely different
condition (e.g., Crohn's Disease). The drugs are specific for individual
mediators that occur in multiple autoimmune diseases, and thus, they are
nonspecific for any one disease. Make sense?

8. Therapeutic (cellular and genetic) procedures

To state, once again (you can probably tell how important I consider
this point to be by now), an autoimmune disease may be organ specific in
its clinical presentation (e.g., Crohn's disease, Graves' disease,
etc.), or its clinical effects may be diffuse or disseminated in
multiple organ systems throughout the body (e.g., SLE, giant-cell
arteritis, RA). Thus, treatments for autoimmune diseases beyond the drug
classes we have been discussing, must be targeted for organ-specific
therapies, or in diffuse disease, delivered as disseminated treatment
throughout the body via cellular and genetic pathways. This is also the
case in cancer therapies. Thus, multiple treatment options and
approaches are common to both autoimmune diseases and cancers. Among the
treatment options common to autoimmune diseases and cancers, besides the
drug categories and specific medications (in Table 5.4) we have been
discussing, are cell transplantation therapies and genetic procedures.

Stem cell transplantation and immunogenomic (CRISPR-Cas9 and CAR-T cell)
therapies have been well received as immunologic and immunogenic
therapies. They are rapidly approaching the standard of care for
targeted, organ-specific treatments as well as disseminated and genomic
therapies. Effectively, stem cell transplantation, CAR-T or CAAR-T cell
replacement therapy, and CRISPR-Cas9 (gene editing) have similar
applications, though with different therapeutic goals in autoimmune
diseases, genetic disorders, cancers and numerous other congenital,
acquired and chronic conditions [38]. It is important to note here that
these innovative and “disruptive” biomedical and cellular therapies for
autoimmune diseases enjoy the benefits that piggyback on the successes
of genetic and cancer treatments and vis a versa [39].

I'm probably going to give you more on these procedures than you will
feel you might need, and you may be correct, at least presently (as you
read this section). But, to use that popular saying I used long ago in
the Preface of this book (regarding my love for immunology and
genetics), “in the spirit of total transparency” I must tell you that
I'm very high on stem cell therapy (regenerative medicine) and
therapeutic (cellular and genetic) procedures. I definitely think they
will have a growing and significant role in immunology and health care
in general going forward. My guess is you will continue to hear more and
more about them and very possibly will take advantage of one or more of
them regarding your own needs sometime in the future. Thus, I felt it is
worth introducing them to you and then letting you be the judge after
you read the section as to how much info you feel you need on stem
cells, CAR-T and CAAR-T-cell replacement therapy, and CRISPR-Cas9 (gene
editing). If I'm right, you'll be happy you read it … I hope.

8.1. Regenerative medicine (stem cell therapy)

Stem cells are cells within the body originating during embryologic
development (from totipotent to pluripotent embryonic stem [ES] cells).
During early life and growth, these undifferentiated ES cells have the
potential to develop into many (and any) different types of adult
(somatic) stem cells found in organs and tissues in the body. They also
differentiate into red blood cells (erythrocytes), platelets, and white
blood cells (leukocytes or WBCs) including neutrophils, basophils,
eosinophils, macrophages, monocytes. Of particular interest in this
discussion are the WBCs associated with the immune system which
differentiate to including lymphocytes (T-cells, B-cells, natural killer
cells) and plasma cells (Fig. 5.2). The adult stem cells serve as a
repair system for the body. In some organs, such as the gut and bone
marrow, they regularly divide to repair and replace worn out or damaged
tissues. In other organs, however, such as the pancreas and the heart,
stem cells only divide under special conditions.

Given their unique regenerative abilities, the adult stem cells offer
new potentials for treating conditions such as immune disorders,
cancers, diabetes, and heart disease. When these cells are used in
cell-based therapies to treat disease, it is referred to as regenerative
or reparative medicine. The more versatile human embryonic (pluripotent
or PSC) stem cells can be harvested through embryos and used for
reproductive purposes through in vitro fertilization. This method has
met with some religious, ethical, and political resistance. However, in
2006 researchers led by Shinya Yamanaka made a (2012 Nobel Prize winning
[40]) breakthrough by identifying conditions that would allow
specialized adult cells to be “reprogrammed” genetically to assume a
stem cell-like state. This new type of stem cell is called an induced
pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) and functions similarly to a natural
pluripotent stem cell with the ability to become virtually any cell type
of the body. This discovery is a very big advance in immunotherapy and
beyond since it removes the need for embryonic stem cells with their
associated ethical and religious resistance.

The clinical value of stem cells lies in the differentiation of
embryonic (pluripotent) stem cells into differentiated adult stem cells.
Whereas this process is essential in repair and regeneration of normal
healthy tissue in the body, it also plays a more sinister role in cells
differentiating into disease-oriented progenitors. Cancers, diabetes,
congenital disabilities, and so many other diseases and human disorders
are generated through genetic and molecular processes producing
differentiation of embryonic and adult stem cells from normal to
abnormal. All medical treatments have benefits and risks, but unproven
stem cell therapies can be particularly unsafe. The FDA will continue
to help with the development and licensing of new stem cell therapies
where the scientific evidence supports the product's safety and
effectiveness [41].

[ Figure 5.2  Stem cell renewal and differentiation.Stem cells can be
readily harvested from bodily tissues and converted into
undifferentiated induced pluripotent cells (iPSC—reprogrammed
embryonic-like cells capable of developing into any type of human cell)
and subsequently into adult blood cells, immune cells, and tissue cells
suitable for transplantation into diseased and degenerated organs and
body structures. Source: Maharaj Institute of Immune Regenerative
Medicine.]

While understanding their role in the production of abnormal conditions,
stem cells have a number of positive values in testing the effectiveness
and safety of new medications, including antitumor therapies and
antiinfectives and in the analysis of a broad range of drugs on
different cell types. Scientists must be able to precisely control the
differentiation of stem cells into the specific cell type on which drugs
can be tested. But, perhaps the most important potential application of
human stem cells is the generation of cells and tissues that could be
used for cell-based therapies (“stem-cell transplantation”). Stem cells,
directed to differentiate into specific cell types, offer the
possibility of a renewable source of replacement cells and tissues to
treat diseases including macular degeneration, spinal cord injury,
stroke, burns, heart disease, diabetes, osteoarthritis, and RA.

Stem cells can be readily harvested from bone marrow (called bone marrow
transplant) and adipose tissue (a bountiful source of stem cells) and
other bodily tissues for conversion into undifferentiated induced
pluripotent cells (iPSCs) suitable for transplantation into diseased and
degenerated organs and body structures (e.g., diabetes, osteoarthritis,
etc.). These iPSC cells then regenerate and begin to replace the
abnormal cells with new, normal cells and even potentially as
functioning organs (organ morphogenesis [42]) (Fig. 5.2). Currently,
muscle and bone tissue are particularly amenable to cell and tissue
regeneration.

Stem cell transplantation procedures (also, see the discussion on bone
marrow transplant in “Transplant therapies,” page 140) include a number
of methods to delivery targeted therapeutic genes through direct
delivery and/or cell delivery (Fig. 5.3). Direct delivery packages the
gene into a vehicle such as a genetically engineered retrovirus that is
injected into the patient, whereupon it penetrates the genome and thus,
is delivered to the targeted organ system. The weakness to this method
of delivery includes the random integration of the gene into the
patient's chromosomes with unknown, potential adverse effects.
Conversely, the cell delivery method removes cells from the patient
(embryonic stem cells [ES], HLA or somatic cell nuclear transfer [SCNT])
and introduces the “packaged gene” in the cells (in vitro, i.e., in a
test tube) and returns them back into the patient. The use of
undifferentiated ES cells as the vehicle for gene retransplant to the
patient (autologous transplantation) offers additional specificity to
the process where the ES cells can replicate only in the target organ
[43].

The objective of stem cell transplantation therapy in immunology is to
destroy the mature, long-lived, and auto-reactive immune cells and
generate a new, properly functioning immune system. This process has
enormous potential in autoimmune diseases, cancers, and other hereditary
and acquired genetic mutations resulting in immune system compromise.
The patient's stem cells are used in a procedure known as autologous
(from “one's self”) hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. First,
patients receive injections of a growth factor, that coaxes large
numbers of hematopoietic stem cells to be released from the bone marrow
into the bloodstream. These cells are harvested from the blood, purified
away from mature immune cells, and stored. After sufficient quantities
of these cells are obtained, the patient undergoes a regimen of
cytotoxic (cell-killing) drug and/or radiation therapy, that eliminates
the mature immune cells. Then, the hematopoietic stem cells are returned
to the patient via a blood transfusion into the circulation where they
migrate to the bone marrow and begin to differentiate becoming mature
immune cells [44]. The body's immune system is then restored [45].

[ Figure 5.3  Direct and cell-based stem cell therapy.Delivery of a
targeted therapeutic gene include direct delivery where the gene is
packaged into a vehicle such as a genetically-engineered retrovirus and
injected into the patient, whereupon it penetrates the genome. The
indirect cell delivery method removes cells from the patient and
introduces the “packaged gene” in the cells (in vitro) and returns them
back into the patient. Undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells can
serve as the vehicle for gene retransplant (autologous
transplantation). Source: National Institute of Health, U.S. Dept. of
Health and Human Services.]

8.2. Immunogenetic and immunogenomic procedures (molecular biology)

The potential for cures is now ready for discussion. (Please take note
that I have used the word “cures” very sparingly throughout this book,
the only other definitive time being the earlier chapters where I
describing the value of “removing the cause” in immune-inflammatory
disease.) The only place I consider our (medical care's) potential to
achieve a “cure” in health care, especially for autoimmune diseases and
cancers (in Chapter 6) lies in the current and evolving genetic
therapies we will now discuss. They include CAR-T and CAAR-T cell
(replacement therapy), and CRISPR-Cas9 (gene editing). Sometimes
referred to as “genetic engineering” or “genetic modification,” it can
be defined as the direct manipulation of the genome using molecular
engineering techniques. Recently developed methods for modifying genes
are often called “gene editing.” [46] It can be applied in two very
different ways: somatic genetic modification and germline genetic
modification.

Somatic genetic modification adds, cuts, or changes the genes in some of
the cells of an existing person, typically to alleviate a medical
condition. A number of these gene therapy techniques are now FDA
approved for specific conditions. Germline genetic modification (quite a
difference from “gene editing”) is used to “change” the genes in eggs,
sperm, or early embryos [47]. A number of these therapies are also FDA
approved, but (as of this writing) under intense scrutiny because of
serious issues that genetic engineering may go well beyond the science
and safety of the field. Bioethical questions also abound regarding
potential uses and misuses of this germline bioscience as well as AI
applications expanding its potential beyond therapeutic purposes. To
wit, some controversial uses of genetic engineering include (but are not
limited to):

1.  • Human genetic enhancement: The intentional modification of the
    human genome to “improve” individuals;
2.  • Human germline genome editing: introducing heritable changes to
    sperm, eggs, or embryos;
3.  • Eugenics: (Eugenics is from a Greek word meaning “normal genes.”)
    [48] Its modern definition describes it as the attempt to direct
    human heredity and evolution to ensure procreative advantage to more
    “desirable” human beings and to discourage or limit reproduction by
    the less desirables (that sounds like a pretty ugly proposition to
    me);
4.  • Genetic cloning: Cloning describes the processes used to create an
    exact genetic replica of another cell, tissue, or organism [49]. The
    copied material, that has the same genetic makeup as the original,
    is referred to as a clone. Of course, the use of genetic cloning for
    monoclonal antibodies is an enormously valuable procedure.

The ethics and pros and cons of all of these techniques are under
excruciating analysis and review by international groups. Undoubtedly
laws and regulations will be instituted in the coming years to mitigate
the dangers of these technologies while maximizing their value in
healthcare. As such, let's look at the procedures and their therapeutic
applications and implications.

8.2.1. CAR-T and CAAR-T cell therapy (gene replacement)

Chimeric antigen receptor T cells (CAR-T cells) are T cells that have
been genetically engineered to give them the new ability to target a
specific protein. The receptors are “chimeric” meaning they combine both
antigen-binding and T-cell activating functions into a single receptor.
The initial premise of CAR-T immunotherapy is to modify T cells to
recognize cancer cells to more effectively target and destroy them [50]
(more on this to be discussed in Chapter 6). Similar to the cancer
treatment by targeting tumor-associated antigens expressed on the
surface of tumor cells, CAR-T cells are now being modified to treat
autoimmune diseases by targeting specific autoantigens or antibodies.
This type of CAR-T cell immunotherapy is referred to as chimeric
autoantibody receptor T (CAAR-T) cell and CAR-Treg (targeting Treg cells
[see Chapter 2, page 26] to help regulate and suppress immune activity)
based on the suspected autoimmune disease.

CAAR-T-cell immunotherapy (Fig. 5.4) begins by removing a patient's T
lymphocytes and transducing them with a DNA plasmid vector (a DNA
molecule distinct from the cell's DNA) and engineered to include a
manipulated or cloned gene sequence or autologous stem cells targeted
for an autoantigen. These modifying T cells are then transferred back
into the patient's bloodstream through a single infusion (Fig. 5.4). The
modified lymphocytes begin to enhance the patient's immune response by
targeting the autoantigen protein. Known as autologous CAAR-T-cell
therapy, this treatment is showing promising results in numerous
autoimmune diseases [51]. A similar process will be presented in Chapter
6, page 165 and Fig. 6.3 using encoded tumor antigens to elicit a
targeted immune response to a cancer.

8.2.2. CRISPR-Cas9 (gene editing)

One of the effective ways of treating autoimmune disease is to identify
the “signature” of offending genes (their “gene expression” or the
number of RNA molecules they are producing), that is abnormal in
autoimmune (and cancer) genes. This identification is accomplished using
a technique called “single-cell RNA sequencing” (scRNA-seq), or more
specifically, TIDE (for Tumor Immune Dysfunction and Exclusion) for
autoimmune genes [52]. With this information, a procedure called
CRISPR-Cas9 (“Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeats”—a family of DNA sequences found in the genomes of prokaryotic
organisms, i.e., organisms where the DNA is in the cell cytoplasm rather
than its nucleus—this is explained in a bit more understandable language
ahead, so feel free to forget this last sentence) and Cas9, an enzyme
sometimes referred to as “the scissor protein.” In essence, the
procedure is an RNA-guided genome editing technology being used to
reengineer T cells.

[ Figure 5.4  Chimeric autoantigen receptor T-cells
(CAART-T).Immunogenic immunotherapy CAAR-T-cell therapy begins by
removing a patient's lymphocytes and transducing them with a DNA plasmid
vector (a DNA molecule distinct from the cell's DNA used as a tool to
clone, transfer, and manipulate genes) that encodes specific tumor
antigens. These modified and targeted lymphocytes are then reintroduced
to the patient's body through a single infusion to attack tumor
cells. Source: National Institute of Health, U.S. Dept. of Health and
Human Services.]

Similar to the way bacterial defenses against viral invasion occurs,
CRISPR-Cas9 is used to induce genome edits by creating targeted DNA
breaks that will trigger specific DNA repair. When considering
“next-generation” genetic processing (“central dogma of molecular
biology”—see Chapter 3, page 51), it can also control the
transcriptional output of genes or alter genome sequences using a
process of nucleotide base editing [53]. As these technologies continue
to mature, it is becoming increasingly possible to efficiently and
accurately alter cellular genomes.

The CRISPR-Cas9 system (Fig. 5.5) creates a small piece of RNA (Cas9)
with a short “guide” sequence that attaches (binds) to a specific target
sequence of DNA identified by NGS (next generation sequencing—see
Chapter 3, page 55) in a genome. The RNA also binds to the Cas9 enzyme
and is used to recognize the DNA sequence. The Cas9 enzyme, acting as a
“scissor,” cuts the DNA at the targeted location. Once the DNA is cut,
the cell's DNA uses its repair machinery to add or delete pieces of
genetic material, or to make changes to the DNA by replacing an existing
segment with a customized DNA sequence [54]. It was first thought that
the stitching back together of the genetic material after the
CRISPR-Cas9 procedure was random [55]. But subsequent studies using a
trained machine learning (ML) algorithm called inDelphi to predict
repairs made to DNA snipped with Cas9 confirmed that the edits aren't
random at all [56,57].

[ Figure 5.5  CRISPR-Cas9 procedure.CRISPR guide RNAs target specific
spots in the genome for the Cas9 enzyme (“genetic scissors”) to cut,
forming a double-strand break. A machine learning algorithm predicts
which types of repairs will be made at a site targeted by a specific
guide RNA. Possibilities include an insertion of a single base pair, a
small deletion, or a larger change known as a microhomology
deletion. Source: National Institute of Health, U.S. Dept. of Health and
Human Services.]

It is worth noting here that in October 2020, the Nobel Prize in
Chemistry was awarded to two molecular biologists, Emmanuelle
Charpentier of the Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
Institute for Infection Biology and Jennifer Doudna of the University of
California, Berkeley, for the development of this revolutionary genome
editing technique often referred to as “genetic scissors.”

The unfortunate aspect of these immunotherapeutic procedures (and CAR-T
cell therapies) are their exorbitant costs. Notwithstanding the
significant benefits these therapies provide, the costs of FDA approved
CAR-T cell therapy and the CRISPR-Cas9 procedure range from $373,000 to
$875,000 for a single treatment [58]. Also, depending on the type of
stem cell procedure, prices can range from $5000 to $25,000 per
procedure [59]. Gene therapies are subject not only to the regulatory
structure of the FDA, but also to the Office of Biotechnology
Activities, and the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee. Excessive
regulatory oversight creates an elongated and expensive route to
approval. By one estimate, approval for a gene therapy costs nearly $5
billion (five times as much as the average cost of FDA drug approvals
[60]). Some insurers are beginning to provide partial coverage of FDA
approved gene therapies, but experimental treatments receive no
third-party coverage other than limited humanitarian exemptions.
Hopefully, as with other major therapeutic discoveries, the costs in
providing the technology will reduce over time.

8.2.3. CRISPR-Cas13 and mRNA screening

A new CRISPR-Cas13 RNA screen has been developed to establish guide RNAs
for the COVID-19 coronavirus and human RNA segments that could be used
in vaccines, therapeutics and diagnostics. Let's defer a full discussion
on this technology to Chapter 7 on infectious diseases, pandemics, and
of course, COVID-19.

8.3. Transplant therapies

One other branch of immunotherapies of profound importance is that of
organ, tissue, and cell transplantation. So too are the profound
immunological challenges presented in such therapies. All of the
considerations of innate and adaptive immunity come into play with
homograph (aka allograph) transplantation, that is transplantation from
one donor to another of the same species (humans for this discussion)
but different genetic (genotype) makeup. Between the basic immunologic
tenet of “self versus nonself” to the anamnestic (memory) response of
the immune system, success with homographic transplantation needs
intricate blood typing, cellular (receptor), and genetic matching of
donor and recipient.

Organ failure (heart, liver, kidneys, etc.) is not unusual in humans, no
less tissue injury and destruction by dermatological diseases
(autoimmune and otherwise, e.g., accidents, and particularly, burns).
So, the need to reduce (suppress) the immune system's natural reaction
to a “foreign transplant” was an obvious necessity in homographic
transplantation. Immunosuppressive drugs, from steroids to the strongest
immunotherapeutic agents, proved capable of doing the job of controlling
the immune response. The introduction of the immunosuppressant drug,
cyclosporine in 1983 revolutionized transplant medicine. But needless to
say, these drugs would also reduce the patient's fundamental (T cell, B
cell, etc.) defenses against other nonself-invader, particularly
opportunistic infectious agents.

Another recognition of homographic transplantation developed with the
Nobel Prize winning discovery of isoantigens (or alloantigen or human
leukocytic antigen, HLA), genetically determined antigens in humans (all
slightly different—like fingerprints) derived from the “selfrecognition”
major histocompatibility complex, MHC (see Chapter 1, page 11).
Isoantigens (blood antigens or HLA complex) are present in some members
of the human species (subset) and not others. Transfusion (blood) or
transplantation of isoantigens into a donor without isoantigens will
produce an immune antibody response (alloimmnuity with alloantibodies)
and result in a blood transfusion reaction or graft rejection (Type II
cytotoxic hypersensitivity reaction, from Chapter 2, page 30). So, it is
critical that donor blood types and isoantigens are properly matched
with recipients.

The discovery of isoantigens led to a more dynamic form of
transplantation, namely bone marrow transplant. Given that the bone
marrow is a principal site of stem cell, blood cell, and immune cell
development, its value in providing a “new” immune system to a qualified
recipient (i.e., isoantigen match) becomes obvious in treating
autoimmune diseases and cancers. Bone marrow transplants may use cells
from your own body (autologous transplant) or from a donor (allogeneic
transplant). In either case, with a proper donor, the stem cells will
yield a new, hopefully revitalized and disease-free immune system.
Through combining these newly developed immunotherapeutic procedures,
new treatment modalities including xenotransplantation may be viable
alternate to allogenic transplantation. Recently (Januray 7, 2022), a
pig heart genetically modified by CRISPR-Cas9 was successfully implanted
in a 57 year-old male. As of this reporting date (February 7, 2022), the
patient is doing well [].

9. Brief research summaries on autoimmune diseases

(Reference citations for each research study presented below can be
found in the corresponding footnote. Also, a listing of available
scientific reference sources and databases used by the author are
included in the book's Acknowledgments.)

-   1. Researchers used the ImmunoChip dataset containing 18,227 Crohn's
    disease patients and 34,050 healthy controls enrolled and genotyped
    by the International IBD Genetics Consortium to be reanalyze via a
    set of ML methods. They managed to detected nearly all the genetic
    variants previously identified by human genome-wide association
    studies among the best predictors, plus additional predictors with
    lower effects. Overall, such an approach may provide a more superior
    alternative method to traditional experimental colitis method of
    understanding the disease by allowing analysis of complex systems
    through crunching of big data [61].
-   2. Artificial intelligence (AI) applications are being studied in
    MS, RA and IBD, generating models using two data types, random
    forests and support vector machines. These are commonly used AI data
    applications for many diseases. Clinical studies in models using
    genetic data were created for the majority of autoimmune diseases.
    The applications are categorized into six broad topics: patient
    identification, risk prediction, diagnosis, disease subtype
    classification, disease progression and outcome, and monitoring and
    management. Results are yielding new and valuable information in the
    diagnosis and management of autoimmune diseases [62].
-   3. A study was conducted to determine if animal, dietary,
    recreational, or occupational exposures are associated with MS risk.
    The least absolute shrinkage and selection operator regression
    methods were used to identify a subset of exposures with potential
    relevance to disease in a large population-based, case–control
    study. There was a suggestive association of pesticide exposure with
    having MS among men, but only in those who were positive for
    HLA-DRB1. Future investigative methods may be useful for of
    concomitant MS risk or prognostic factors [63].
-   4. CRISPR-Cas9 tools have accelerated the pace of genomic research
    by permitting highly efficient knockouts or edits of virtually any
    gene in cells or model organisms. Multiple CRISPR-Cas9–based
    clinical trials are in progress or are expected to begin soon.
    Although Cas9-engineered cells haven't yet demonstrated efficacy at
    scale, early trial results suggest that such cells are stable and
    don't cause acute adverse reactions in humans. Long-term safety is
    yet to be determined. Current applications largely focus on
    single-gene disorders for which gene editing can be carried out
    ex vivo on appropriate cells, such as bone marrow hematopoietic stem
    cells in the case of sickle cell anemia. Exploration is under way to
    develop delivery systems that can target the gene-editing apparatus
    to the appropriate tissue in vivo [64].
-   5. ML approaches were employed to integrate gene expression data
    from three SLE data sets and used them to classify patients as
    having active or inactive disease as characterized by standard
    clinical composite outcome measures. Both raw whole blood gene
    expression data and informative gene modules were employed with
    various classification algorithms. The use of gene modules rather
    than raw gene expression was more robust, achieving classification
    accuracies of approximately 70% regardless of how the training and
    testing sets were formed [65].
-   6. MS: An AI algorithm was created to predict the expanded
    disability status scale (EDSS) score of patients with MS at 2years
    solely based on age, sex and fluid attenuated inversion recovery
    (FLAIR) MRI data. The algorithm combined several complementary
    predictors: a pure deep learning predictor based on a convolutional
    neural network that learns from the images, as well as classical
    machine-learning predictors. The method predicted two-year clinical
    disability in patients with MS with a mean EDSS score error of 1.7.
    This supports the use of such a model to predict EDSS score
    progression [66].
-   7. Type 1 diabetes: An algorithm that provides weekly insulin dosage
    recommendations to adults employs a unique virtual platform to
    generate over 50,000 glucose observations to identify causes of
    hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia and determine necessary insulin
    adjustments from a set of 12 potential recommendations. The
    algorithm achieves an overall agreement with board-certified
    endocrinologists of 67.9%. These data indicate that the algorithm
    allows for early identification of dangerous insulin regimens and
    may be used to improve glycemic outcomes and prevent
    life-threatening complications in people with T1D [67].
-   8. Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS): GBS includes acute motor axonal
    neuropathy, acute motor and sensory axonal neuropathy, and
    pharyngeal-cervical-brachial weakness. Newly developed technologies,
    including metabolite analysis, peripheral nerve ultrasound, and
    feature selection, are facilitating more accurate diagnosis of
    axonal GBS. Nevertheless, some key issues, such as genetic
    susceptibilities, remain unanswered, and moreover, current therapies
    bear limitations [68].
-   9. In an effort to apply AI to the challenging task of classifying
    thyroid nodules in Graves' disease, an image similarity algorithm
    showed accuracy that is similar, and in some aspects better, than
    the best available ultrasound-based classification systems. By using
    image similarity AI models, subjectivity is eliminated resulting in
    a decrease in the number of unnecessary biopsies by as much as 50%.
    A deep learning model was also used to process all available images
    for 482 nodules from patients who underwent a biopsy or thyroid
    surgery. Overall, 66 nodules were malignant in the training set and
    33 were malignant in the test nodules. Overall, the system's
    accuracy was 81.5%. The results suggest that the use of the image
    similarity AI system could result in a 57.3% reduction in biopsies
    [69].
-   10. In 1year in the United States, it was reported that 31% of
    medical lawsuits were related to either an inordinate delay in the
    diagnosis or failure to make the correct diagnosis. It is
    anticipated that precision medicine coupled with AI will help
    healthcare providers stay abreast of current literature and predict
    individual susceptibility to primary or secondary autoinflammatory
    and autoimmune conditions [70].
-   11. Identification of patients with autoimmune diseases was studied
    utilizing ML methods and employing natural language processing
    methods from electronic medical records. The algorithms were
    intended to replace International Classification of Diseases billing
    codes that have error rates of between 17.1% and 76.9% due to
    inconsistent terminology. The AI process improved the efficiency of
    algorithms for this purpose. Prediction of disease risk and
    identification of novel risk factors through feature selection was
    documented for IBD, type 1 diabetes (T1D), RA, SLE, and MS. ML
    specifically for early diagnosis was specified by seven studies for
    the later onset degenerative conditions MS and RA. Disease
    progression and outcome was a focus for 27 studies. Other considered
    issues were disease severity, treatment response, and survival
    prediction. Disease progression and outcome was the second-most
    prevalent area for model development. The majority of the data used
    was clinical, with very few papers utilizing “omic” data. These
    models could be applied to more difficult tasks that reflect the
    complexity of autoimmune disease. The advances have the potential to
    bring personalized medicine closer for patients with complex and
    chronic disease [71].
-   12. Autoimmune diseases are mostly characterized by autoantibodies
    in the patients' serum or cerebrospinal fluid, representing
    diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers. Research has focused on single
    autoantigens or panels of single autoantigens. Researchers are now
    broadening their focus by addressing the entire autoantigen
    repertoire in a systemic “omics-like” (analyzing large amounts of
    data) approach. This aims to capture the enormous biodiversity in
    the sets of targeted antigens and pave the way toward a more
    holistic understanding of the character of antibody-related humoral
    immune responses. Clusters of autoantigens can be identified that
    share certain functional or spatial properties, or clusters of
    patients comprising clinical subgroups potentially useful for
    patient stratification. This may enhance the understanding of
    autoimmune diseases in a more comprehensive way compared to current
    single or panel autoantibody approaches [72].
-   13. Unraveling the genetic and environmental underpinnings of
    autoimmune disease has become a major focus at the National
    Institute of Environmental Health Sciences of the National Institute
    of Health. The process of identifying adverse genetic sites (likely
    multiple mutations) in the person's genome is overwhelming. As we
    described in Chapter 3, the potential for those mutations in the
    sequencing of the four base compounds within the 20,000 to 25,000
    genes in the human genome exceeds 2.5×10²⁰ possibilities spread
    among the 37.2 trillion somatic cells. Thanks to big data analytics
    and deep learning (AI methods), genetic loci for immune diseases
    (immunodeficiencies) are now being identified in a timely diagnostic
    manner (days to weeks vs. months to years). This research is helping
    to better identify genetic mutations and their associated disease
    states combined with the new FDA approved cellular and gene
    therapies (presented above). It is creating new horizons in the
    treatment, management, cures and prevention of autoimmune diseases
    [73].
-   
-   14. Advances in “omics” technologies (e.g., epigenomics, genomics,
    transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, etc.), also called,
    systems-based approaches, are now utilized to identify molecular
    targets including biomarkers that can reveal the disease state or
    the ability to respond to a specific treatment. This capability is
    providing scientists and clinicians with the ability to generate
    datasets consisting of molecular insights of autoimmune disease
    pathogenesis [74].
-   15. AI algorithms now allow categorization of patients based on
    their specific differences through screening a patient's genome,
    transcriptome, proteome, epigenome, immunome, and microbiome.
    Integrating the omics datasets using systems biology-based
    approaches may advance understanding of the underlying causative
    factors in individual patients. This ability could contribute to the
    diagnosis and prognosis of autoimmune diseases, and whether such
    diagnostic information could assist with predictions of therapy
    efficacy and adverse effects. This offers enormous potential for
    personalized medicine (see Chapter 3, page 57) in autoimmune
    diseases and evaluating the use of big data in disease management
    [75].

Chapter highlights (key points and paradoxical-related information)

-   1. Among the multiple paradoxes associated with autoimmune diseases,
    the threshold question is “why does the body interpret ‘self’ as
    ‘foreign’ (nonself) and treats it as an antigen, specifically an
    ‘autoantigen’?”
-   2. Another paradox of autoimmune diseases are their higher
    prevalence in females with some theories including male testosterone
    protection, pregnancy factors, greater body fat in females,
    lifespan, and even the “hygiene hypothesis” compromising the
    microbiome and sexual dimorphism.
-   3. Perhaps the most credible and validated, science-based theory
    regarding female bias in autoimmune diseases lies in the
    immunogenomic science of X chromosome inactivation (XCI) or
    “lyonization” and its intimate relationship with microRNA.
-   4. Beyond a prolonged inflammatory process producing autoimmune
    disease, other theories of the suggested pathogenesis of autoimmune
    diseases include the patient’s genome; environmental factors;
    accumulation of proinflammatory cytokines; rogue B cells; epitope
    spreading; and the microbiome.
-   5. In that chronic inflammation and its perivascular characteristics
    (see Chapter 4) are the pathological basis of autoimmune disease,
    its clinical presentation(s) can be organ specific or multisystem
    involvement.
-   
-   6. There are over 88 clinical conditions classified as autoimmune
    diseases effecting greater than 8% of the general population, with
    the top 10 being conditions highly recognizable, some like
    rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),
    inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and multiple sclerosis.
-   7. Again, because of the chronic inflammatory etiology of autoimmune
    diseases, afflicted patients are categorized as chronic disease
    patients, and oftentimes are comorbidity patients.
-   8. Treatment for autoimmune diseases, as with chronic inflammation
    (in Chapter 4) is categorized as “nonspecific” immunotherapies which
    include biologics like DMARDs (disease-modifying antirheumatic
    drugs); hydroxychloroquine (you’ve heard of that one, I’m sure!);
    methotrexate; sulfasalazine; checkpoint inhibitors; more in Chapter
    6; and of course, monoclonal antibodies.
-   9. Emerging as a strong adjunct to pharmacologic immunotherapies are
    cellular and genetic (molecular biology) therapeutic procedures
    sometimes referred to as “genetic engineering” or “genetic
    modification” including CAR-T and CAAR-T cell (replacement therapy),
    CRISPR-Cas9 (gene editing), and stem cell therapy (regenerative
    medicine).
-   10. Beyond immunopharmacothearpies and molecular biologic
    procedures, tissue and organ transplantation therapy continue to
    advance in organ-specific autoimmune disease with the use of
    adjunctive immunosuppression drugs.

References

1. Fairweather D, Rose N.R. Women and autoimmune diseases.  Emerg Infect
Dis . November 2004;10(11):2005–2011.

2. Jacobson D.L, Gange S.J, Rose N.R, Graham N.M. Epidemiology and
estimated population burden of selected autoimmune diseases in the
United States.  Clin Immunol Immunopathol . September
1997;84(B):223–243.

3. Larson C.  New theories explaining why women are more susceptible to
autoimmune disease than men . Managed Healthcare; June 10, 2020.

4. Mousavi M.J, Mahmoudi M, Ghotloo S. Escape from X chromosome
inactivation and female bias of autoimmune diseases.  Mol Med
. 2020;26:127.

5. Youness A, Miquel C.H, Guéry J.C. Escape from X chromosome
inactivation and the female predominance in autoimmune diseases.  Int J
Mol Sci . 2021;22(B):1114.

6. Macfarlane L.A, Murphy P.R. MicroRNA: biogenesis, function and role
in cancer.  Curr Genom . January 23, 2021;11(7):537–561.

7. Orbai A.M.  Autoimmune disease: why is my immune system attacking
itself . Johns Hopkins Health; 2019.

8. Kuchroo V.K, Ohashi P.S, Sartor R.B, et al. Dysregulation of immune
homeostasis in autoimmune diseases.  Nat Med . 2021;18:42–47.

9. Tsokos G.C. Autoimmunity and organ damage in systemic lupus
erythematosus.  Nat Immunol . 2020;21:605–614.

10. Satoab S, Takaokaab A. Subchapter 39A – interleukins. In: 2nd ed. 
Handbook of hormones . vol. 1. Academic Press; 2021:437–439. .

11. Disease Development. How do autoimmune diseases unfold?  Johns
Hopkins Med Pathol . 2019.

12. Kelly P.N. Cells gone rogue.  Science . March 13,
2020;367(6483):1208.

13. Medline.  Autoimmune disorders . U.S. National library of medicine.
U.S. Department of health and human Services. National Institutes of
Health; July 2, 2020.

14. Moudgil K.D. Viewing autoimmune pathogenesis from the perspective of
antigen processing and determinant hierarchy.  Immunology
. 2020:329–339.

15. Wang E.Y, Mao T, Klein J, et al. Diverse functional autoantibodies
in patients with COVID-19.  Nature . 2021;595:283–288.

16. Ibid. Moudgil. 14.

17. Søren E, Degn S.E, van der Poel C.E, Firl D.J, et al. Clonal
evolution of autoreactive germinal centers.  Cell . August 24,
2017;170(Issue 5):P913–P926 E19.

18. Jiao Y, Wu L, Huntington N.D, Zhang X. Crosstalk between gut
microbiota and innate immunity and its implication in autoimmune
diseases.  Front Immunol . 2020;11:282.

19. Markowiak-Kopeć P, Śliżewska K. The effect of probiotics on the
production of short-chain fatty acids by human intestinal microbiome. 
Nutrients . 2020;12(C):1107.

[19a] Gruber C.N, Patel R.S, Trachtman R, et al. Mapping systemic
inflammation and antibody responses in multisystem inflammatory syndrome
in children (MIS-C).  Cell . November 12, 2020;183(4):982–995.

20. Autoimmune diseases. Cleveland Clinic; July 21, 2021.

21. Ibid. Autoimmune diseases. 13.

22. What is precision medicine. MedlinePlus . NIH. National U.S. Library
of Medicine; September 22, 2020. USA.gov.

23. Chen L, Deng H, Cui H, et al. Inflammatory responses and
inflammation-associated diseases in organs.  Oncotarget . January 23,
2019;9(6):7204–7218.

24. Primary immunodeficiency. Mayo Clinic; January 30, 2020.

25. Eustice C.  Autoimmune disease types and treatment
. VeryWellHealth; May 6, 2019.

26. Finer N, Garnett S.P, Bruun J.M. COVID-19 and obesity.  Clin Obes
. April 27, 2020;10(B):e12365.

27. Sampson S, Watson S.  Autoimmune diseases: types, symptoms, causes,
and more . Healthline; March 26, 2019.

28. Carteron N.  A list of autoimmune diseases and their symptoms
. Medical News Today; June 29, 2020.

29. Ibid. Autoimmune Diseases. 13.

30. Hayterab S.M, Cookac M.C. Updated assessment of the prevalence,
spectrum and case definition of autoimmune disease.  Autoimmun Rev
. August 10, 2012;11:754–765.

[30a] Ibid. Gruber et al. 19a.

31. Type 1 diabetes. Genetics home reference . U.S. National Library of
Medicine; October 15, 2019.

32. Marovich M, Mascola J.R, Cohen M.S. Monoclonal antibodies for
prevention and treatment of COVID-19.  JAMA . 2020;324(A):131–132.

33. Ogbru O.  Biologics (biologic drug class) . MedicineNet; 2019.

34. Cohen S, Cannella A.  Patient education: disease-modifying
antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) (Beyond the Basics) . February 28, 2019.

35. Ibid. Ogbru. 33.

36. Hui E. Immune checkpoint inhibitors.  J Cell Biol
. 2019;218(B):740–741.

37. Falkesgaard Højen J, Vindvad Kristensen M.L, McKee A.S, et
al. IL-1R3 blockade broadly attenuates the functions of six members of
the IL-1 family, revealing their contribution to models of disease.  Nat
Immunol . 2019;20(9).

38. Zhang Z, Zhang Y, Gao F, et al. CRISPR/Cas9 genome-editing system in
human stem cells: current status and prospects.  Mol Ther Nucleic Acids
. 2017;9:230–241.

39. Immunotherapies for autoimmune diseases.  Nat Biomed Eng . April 5,
2019;3:247. .

40. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/2012/press-release/.

41. FDA Warns About Stem Cell Therapies. U.S. Food and Drug
Administration; September 3, 2019.

42. Eguizabal C, Aran B, Geens M, et al. Two decades of embryonic stem
cells: a historical overview.  Hum Reprod
. 2019:1–17. doi: 10.1093/hropen/hoy024.

43. Zwaka T.P.  Use of genetically modified stem cells in experimental
gene therapies . National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services; August 10, 2020.

44. National Cancer Institute, .  Dictionary . National Institute of
Health; 2019.

45. NIH. Stem Cell Information, .  Autoimmune diseases and the promise
of stem cell-based . National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services; August 10, 2020.

46. Solomon M.Z.  Gene editing humans: it's not just about safety
. Scientific American; August 10, 2019.

47. Editorial. Germline gene-editing research needs rules.  Nature
. March 13, 2019;567:145.

48. Friedmann T. Genetic therapies, human genetic enhancement, and …
eugenics?  Gene Ther . July 4, 2019;26:351–353.

49. Medline Plus, .  Cloning. U.S. Department of health and human
Services . National Institutes of Health. U.S. National Library of
Medicine; April 19, 2019.

50. Minutolo NG, Hollander EE, Powell Jr DJ. The emergence of universal
immune receptor T cell therapy for cancer. Front Oncol March 26, 2019.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2019.00176.

51. Shank B.R, Do B, Sevin A, et al. Chimeric antigen receptor T cells
in hematologic malignancies.  Pharmacotherapy . 2017;37(B):334–345.

52. Benhenda M.  How to better predict cancer immunotherapy results
. Medium AI Lab; May 22, 2019.

53. Clark M.M, Hildreth A, Batalov S, et al. Diagnosis of genetic
diseases in seriously ill children by rapid whole-genome sequencing and
automated phenotyping and interpretation.  Sci Transl Med . April 24,
2019;11(489).

54. Genetics Home Reference, .  What are genome editing and CRISPR-Cas9?
NIH . USA.gov: National U.S. Library of Medicine; October 1, 2019.

55. van Overbeek M, Capurso D, Carter M.M, et al. DNA repair profiling
reveals nonrandom outcomes at Cas9-mediated breaks.  Mol Cell . August
18, 2016;63(Issue 4):P633–P646.

56. Shen M.W, Sherwood R, et al. Predictable and precise template-free
CRISPR editing of pathogenic variants.  Nature . 2018;563:646–651.

57. Allen F, Parts L, et al. Predicting the mutations generated by
repair of Cas9-induced double-strand breaks.  Nat Biotechnol
. 2019;37:64–72.

58. March R.J.  Why this new gene therapy drug costs $2.1 million 2019
. Foundation for Economic Education; June 3, 2019.

59. Hildreth C.  Cost of stem cell therapy and why it's so expensive
. BioInformant; November 21, 2018.

60. Ramina G.  Regulation and oversight of gene therapy in the US
. Regulatory Focus.org; February 2017.

[60a] Reardon S. First pig-to-human heart transplant: what can
scientists learn?  Nature . 2020;601:305–306.

61. Romagnoni A, Jégou S, Van Steen K, et al. Comparative performances
of machine learning methods for classifying Crohn disease patients using
genome-wide genotyping data. International Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Genetics Consortium (IIBDGC).  Sci Rep . July 17, 2019;9(1):10351. .

62. Stafford I.S, Kellermann M, Mossotto E, et al. A systematic review
of the applications of artificial intelligence and machine learning in
autoimmune diseases.  NPJ Digit Med . March 9, 2020;3:30.

63. Mowry E.M, Hedström A.K, Gianfrancesco M.A, et al. Incorporating
machine learning approaches to assess putative environmental risk
factors for multiple sclerosis.  Mult Scler Relat Disord . August 24,
2018:135–141.

64. Broeders M, Herrero-Hernandez P, Ernst M.P.T, et al. Sharpening the
molecular scissors: advances in gene-editing technology.  iScience
. 2020;23 100789-100789.

65. Kegerreis B, Catalina M.D, Bachali P, et al. Machine learning
approaches to predict lupus disease activity from gene expression data. 
Sci Rep . 2019;9:9617.

66. Roca P, Attye A, Colas L, et al. Artificial intelligence to predict
clinical disability in patients with multiple sclerosis using FLAIR
MRI.  Diagnost & Interv Imag . July 7, 2020;101(12):795–802.

67. Tyler N.S, Mosquera-Lopez C.M, Wilson L.M, et al. An artificial
intelligence decision support system for the management of type 1
diabetes.  Nat Metab . 2020;2:612–619.

68. Shang P, Zhu M, Wang Y, et al. Axonal variants of Guillain-Barré
syndrome: an update. J Neurol March 5, 2020;268(7):2402–19.

69. Melville N.A.  AI thyroid nodule classification could reduce
biopsies by 50% . Medscape Medical News > Conference News; November 7,
2019.

70. Pinal-Fernandez I, Mammen A.L. On using machine learning algorithms
to define clinically meaningful patient subgroups.  Ann Rheum Dis . June
21, 2019 doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2019-215852.

71.
Stafford I.S, Kellermann M, Mossotto E, Beattie R.M, MacArthur B.D, Ennis S. A systematic
review of the applications of artificial intelligence and machine
learning in autoimmune diseases.  NPJ Digit Med . March 9, 2020;3:30.

72. Moritzae C.P, Paul S, Stoevesan O, et al. Autoantigenomics: holistic
characterization of autoantigen repertoires for a better understanding
of autoimmune diseases.  Autoimmun Rev . February 2020;19(2).

73. National Institute of Environmental Health Science. Autoimmune
disease. NIH; 2019. USA.gov.

74. Seyhan A.A, Carini C. Are innovation and new technologies in
precision medicine paving a new era in patients' centric care?  J Transl
Med . April 5, 2019;17(1):114.

75. Seyed N.S, Madgwick M, Sudhakar P, et al. Big data in IBD: big
progress for clinical practice.  BMJ . February 28, 2020;69(8).

6: Cancer

immunology's cruelest enemy and greatest challenge

Abstract

As the second leading cause of death, cancer is generally considered the
most feared disease due to its frequently unrelenting clinical course.
On a positive note, there has been a decline in the cancer death rate by
29% from 1991 to 2017. Its etiology is known to be a DNA genetic
mutation (oncogenesis) producing abnormal cells that divide
uncontrollably and have the ability to infiltrate and destroy normal
body tissue. There are numerous theories regarding cancer mutations
including oncoevolution (pro-oncogenes promoting cell division); tumor
suppressor gene, p53 (“guardian of the genome”); environmental factors
(e.g., smoking, pollution, chronic irritation); infectious causes,
particularly viruses; X chromosome inactivation and microRNA;
epigenetics; the microbiome; and more. The association between cancer
and the immune system lies in novel immunomodulating therapies being
used separately and in combination with chemotherapies and radiation
therapy. Monoclonal antibodies used alone and in combination are showing
great promise as are gene editing (CRISPR-Cas9) and gene replacement
(CAR-T cell) therapies.

Keywords

Cancering; CAR-T cell; CRISPR-Cas9; Gene editing; Gene replacement;
Guardian of the genome; Immuno-oncology; Immunotherapy; Microbiome;
MicroRNA; Oncoevolution; p53; Stem cell therapy; X chromosome
inactivation (XCI)

The immune system's goal is to protect the body against invaders either
from without, such as microbes, or from within, such as cancers and
different types of neoplastic transformation.

Anthony S. Fauci.

1. Introduction

You have probably seen the signs by now, the popular “MD Anderson Cancer
Center” signs with a bold red slash mark through the word [icon] .
You've just gotta love it. I doubt there are many words in the human
vocabulary that engender more anxiety, uneasiness, and fear than the
word “cancer.” It's so near and painful to almost all of us with either
an unfortunate direct, personal experience with the disease or agonizing
over a loved one, family member or friend suffering through a cancer
diagnosis. So, kudos to MD Anderson (or whoever created their signage)
for “crossing it out” as is everyone's hope. Thank you.

2. “Cancering”

There was a strong temptation on my part to title this chapter
“Cancering.” To understand cancer, one must not think of it as a noun,
but rather as a verb. Ironically, while doing my research for this
Chapter, I came across an article by a world-renowned cancer expert, W.
Daniel Hillis, who used the word “cancering.” [1] He even begins his
lengthy, two-part article with the statement, “We make a mistake when we
think of cancer as a noun.” I mention Dr. Hillis' comment for three
reasons. First, I want to make sure no one reading this book thinks I
plagiarized the word “cancering” without due recognition to the
originator (if only I had beat him to press!). Second, frankly, I'm so
damn proud of myself for independently thinking up a unique premise
about cancer, even-though it was thought of previously by a recognized
cancer expert (at least it puts me in good company). And finally, I want
to urge you to consider reviewing or reading (also available on audio)
the excellent article by Dr. Hillis. Part 1 is a scholarly and in-depth
study in molecular biology, but Part 2 is clinical with some interesting
discussions at a very understandable level.

Now a quick explanation of “cancering.”

As you will recall from the discussion back in Chapter 3 (page 55) on
genetics and genomics by the numbers, “…, the rate of acquired mutations
in the human genome (with about 37 trillion somatic [body] cells) is in
the trillions.” As we stated regarding that phenomenal calculation, “…
only an infinitesimal amount of them (less than 60 per gene), override
“apoptosis” to produce genetic disorders and disease.” Nonetheless,
those mutations are continually occurring, and given the rules of large
number combinations and probabilities, virtually all mutations have the
potential to become irregular, accumulate, or mutate into a cancer [2].
Thus, if you follow the mathematical law of large numbers, it follows
that “If you live long enough (or your luck runs out earlier), you will
get cancer.” [3] Thus, throughout our lives, we are all “cancering.”

3. The incidence and prevalence of cancer

There are over 185 types of cancers, according to the National Cancer
Institute that also lists the most common cancers (Table 6.1). Leading
the list of the top 10 cancers in America [4] (Table 6.2) is skin cancer
(I've had two Mohs procedures for basal cell carcinoma [BCC] which are
“no fun”) followed by lung cancer which is the leading cause of cancer
deaths and the second leading cause of all deaths in America [5]. Thus,
given lung cancer, according to the Center for Disease Control, cancers
are the second leading cause of death in America, second only to
cardiovascular deaths (see Chapter 4, Table 4.4, page 85). Tragically,
in 2020 COVID-19 became the third leading cause of death (345,323) in
the U.S. just behind heart disease and cancer [6].

(Update: As part of my proofreading of this manuscript in late 2021, the
earlier statistic quoted above has tragically escalated to over 700,000
deaths and now the leading cause of death in the U.S [7], How sad to
have ever let that happen.)

Indeed, with cancer, we are dealing with a devastating disease that is
being better understood with an expanding commitment to immunologic,
genetic, and cancer research. On a positive note, a recent study
(January 2020) showed a decline in the cancer death rate by 29% from
1991 to 2017. This included a 2.2% drop from 2016 to 2017, the most
significant single-year reduction in cancer mortality ever reported
according to the American Cancer Society's annual report on cancer rates
and trends. The 26-year decline is driven primarily by a long-term
decrease in death rates for the four major cancers; lung, colorectal,
breast, and prostate [8]. Recent mortality declines were also dramatic
for melanoma of the skin, while long-term rapid increases in liver
cancer mortality have decreased in women and stabilized in men. The
accelerated drops we are seeing are likely due, at least in part, to the
improved diagnosis and management of the common cancer types (Table 6.1
above) as well as more public health education and messaging about
cancer prevention (e.g., smoking cessation advertising). Also, according
to William G. Cance, M.D., chief medical and scientific officer for the
American Cancer Society, immunotherapy has had a profound effect on our
ability to treat and control cancers (I guess this might be a nice time
to add immunotherapy to “our best friend” list in immunology.)

 

Table 6.1

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Bladder cancer                                                  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Breast cancer                                                   |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Colon and rectal cancer                                         |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Endometrial cancer                                              |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Kidney cancer                                                   |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Leukemia                                                        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Liver cancer                                                    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Lung cancer                                                     |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Melanoma                                                        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Non-Hodgkins lymphoma                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Pancreatic cancer                                               |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Prostate cancer                                                 |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Thyroid cancer                                                  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

: Common cancer types.

Source: National Cancer Institute, 2019.

 

Table 6.2

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   1. Skin cancer                                                    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   2. Lung cancer                                                    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   3. Prostate cancer                                                |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   4. Breast cancer                                                  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   5. Colorectal cancer                                              |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   6. Kidney (renal) cancer                                          |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   7. Bladder cancer                                                 |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   8. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma                                         |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   9. Thyroid cancer                                                 |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| -   10. Endometrial cancer                                            |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

: Top 10 (10) cancers in America.

Source: Louis J. Catania © 2022.

Sadly, as a late edition to this otherwise positive news about cancer
rates, during manuscript proofing of this book, new data has indicated a
resurgence in the rates of cancer development and mortality [9]. Among
one million patients studied between 2010 and 2019 in 204 countries,
there was greater than a 26% increase in the rate of new cancers. The
largest percentage increase in incidence and mortality during that last
decade occurred in the lower socioeconomic populations. Contributing and
exacerbating this distressing trend are the direct and indirect effects
of COVID-19 over the past two years. The virus has been identified as a
significant risk factor in multiple ways. The immunocompromised and
immunosuppressed cancer patient becomes more vulnerable to SARS-CoV-2
infection and increased mortality risk, especially in a hospital
environment common in cancer care [10]. Epidemiologically, the pandemic
has decreased access and caused delays in early cancer diagnosis and
care due to the increased inaccessibility in hospital and medical care
secondary to the over-burdened healthcare system from COVID-19 patients.
This dynamic has also resulted in increased cancer mortality rates and
avoidable cancer deaths since early 2020 [11].

4. Description and etiologies of cancers

Inherited genetic disorders result in gene alterations in virtually
every cell in our body [12]. As a result, these disorders tend to affect
many tissues, organs, and body systems. Often, supportive and palliative
treatment approaches are available to manage some of the associated
signs and symptoms of significant diseases. For example, disorders
associated with heart defects might be treated with surgery to repair
the defect or with a heart transplant. Inborn errors of metabolism
disrupt the production of specific enzymes that dietary changes or
replacement therapies may benefit and help prevent immediate and future
complications. And when genetic screening identifies an inherent risk in
one's genome (e.g., a known cancer gene such as BRCA1, BRCA2, or PALB2
gene for breast cancer), management may include counseling, more
frequent cancer screening, or even preventive (prophylactic) surgery to
remove the tissues at highest risk of becoming cancerous (e.g.,
preventive mastectomy).

At the risk of becoming a real nuisance, if not downright annoying,
allow me to quickly defend my use of the word “disorder” a few times in
the previous paragraph. I am sure you recall my somewhat droning
differentiation of the term “disorder” from “disease” back in the book’s
Preface and again in Chapter 4, page 88 in defense of my theory of
chronic inflammation being the basis of all “disease.” I’m sure there
are some folks reading the previous paragraph thinking, “the old boy has
contradicted his own theory by using ‘disorder’ regarding “heart
defects,” “inborn errors of metabolism,” and “gene abnormalities.” Not
so. These abnormalities fit the definition of “disorders” as defined in
the Preface and Chapter 4 as “…any deviation from or interruption of
normal structure or function.” Now please understand, I am not trying to
nitpick or be defensive as much as making a relevant point as we enter
this discussion on cancer.

We should understand that while the origins of cancers begin as a
“…deviation from or interruption of normal structure or function,” i.e.,
“disorders,” what we know as cancer, really is a disease, “…an abnormal
biological process (a pathology) with a specific cause (disorder) and
identifiable characteristics (signs and symptoms).” And my point is that
“cancer,” the disease, is in fact, chronic inflammation.

I rest my case! But after making such a fuss, I better defend it, yet
again, by the end of this chapter.

4.1. Random genetic mistakes

In our immunology and genetics discussions up to this point, we have
discussed environmental factors (carcinogens) and radiation-caused
mutations that may contribute to the development of cancer. The damage
to our DNA through both injury and chronic irritation (remember our
comments on smoking in Chapter 4?) all can lead to cumulative mutations
and resultant “cancering.” But up to now, we haven't considered the
possibility of a random mistake (oncogenesis) in one of those trillions
of normal DNA replications that escape apoptosis and result in a
cancer-causing mutation [13]. A series of these mutations
(carcinogenesis) in a specific gene (oncogene) class can “de novo”
transform a normal cell into a neoplastic (cancer) cell [14].

4.2. Epigenetics

Beyond “a random genetic mistake” producing cancer, there are several
other genetic irregularities that can create carcinogenesis. Epigenetics
(see Chapter 3, page 62) is the study of changes in organisms (humans
included) caused by modification of gene expression (protein production)
rather than alteration of the genetic code itself. As with all genetic
activity, epigenetics can turn gene expression on or off by the DNA
genetic code or by environmental factors. Such abnormalities can produce
unpredictable cancers.

4.3. Oncoevolution and p53

Proto-oncogenes are genes that promote cell growth and cellular
division, whereas tumor suppressor genes discourage cell growth, or
briefly halt the process of DNA repair. A series of many mutations to
these proto-oncogenes are needed before a standard cell transforms into
a neoplastic cell. This phenomenon is referred to as “oncoevolution.”
[15] Tumor suppressor genes that are activated by cellular stress or
injury that produce free-floating genetic material can trigger enzymes
and pathways that result in the activation of a tumor suppressor gene,
p53. This tumor suppression protein arrests the progression of the
abnormal cell cycle (apoptosis), preventing mutations from being passed
on to subsequent cells [16]. This p53 protein has been named the
“guardian of the genome.” In other words, HOORAY for p53!

4.4. Infectious agents

It is estimated that about 20% of cancers are caused by infectious
agents [17]. Organisms of the microbiome and its dysbiosis (an imbalance
between the types of organisms) can induce carcinogenesis through direct
DNA damage and inflammation, indirectly through modulation of immune
responses, or by chronic inflammatory responses induced by bacterial
metabolites. Among infectious agents, viruses tend to have a higher risk
as carcinogens, although bacteria and parasites may also be implicated.
Some viruses can disrupt signaling that normally keeps cell growth and
proliferation in check. Also, infections can weaken the immune system or
cause chronic inflammation that may lead to mutations and subsequent
cancers. The most significant viral risks for cancers include the
following [18]:

1.  • Epstein–Barr Virus (EBV): Risk of lymphoma and cancers of the nose
    and throat;
2.  • Hepatitis B Virus and Hepatitis C Virus (HBV and HCV): Risk of
    liver cancer;
3.  • Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV): Risk of Kaposi sarcoma,
    lymphomas (including both non-Hodgkins lymphoma and Hodgkins
    disease), and cancers of the cervix, anus, lung, liver, and throat;
4.  • Human Papillomaviruses (HPVs): Risk of all cervical cancers and
    penile cancers;
5.  • Human T-Cell Leukemia/Lymphoma Virus Type 1 (HTLV-1): Risk of
    adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL);
6.  • Merkel Cell Polyomavirus (MCPyV): Risk of Merkel cell carcinoma;
7.  • Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori): Risk of stomach cancer.

4.5. The microbiome

As mentioned in our previous discussion of infectious agents, it is
estimated that individual microbial pathogens contribute to cancer
development in approximately 20% of total cases [19]. Among these
pathogens, genetic mutations are the main drivers of tumor initiation,
with contributions from secondary risk factors like diet, age, lifestyle
factors, microbes etc. However, we now know that the microbiome can
regulate the effects of tumor-driven mutations and progression through
direct effects on the tumor cells and indirectly through manipulation of
the immune system. The microbiota may affect tumor immunity by
regulating the host immune system and the tumor's microenvironment [20].

Some bacteria help fight tumors by activating immunity, while others
mediate immunosuppression to help cancer cells escape from the immune
system [21]. The composition of the intestinal microbiota that is
sensitive to treatment or prone to adverse reactions can be used as
biomarkers to predict the prognosis of immunotherapy and may also assist
immunotherapies. The role of the microbiota in regulating not only gut
but also systemic immune responses is being studied as to the impact on
cancer immunotherapies, particularly with agents targeting the
immunologic checkpoints PD-1 and CTLA-4 (discussed previously in
Chapters 3 and 5 and later in this chapter).

Efforts are underway to establish the role of each microbe or group of
microbes in different kinds of cancers. Physiological responses to
immunotherapy, antibiotic, radiation, and chemotherapy in microbes need
to be explored. There are numerous immunotherapy strategies being
implemented to manipulate multiple immune pathways and molecules. These
strategies and increased understanding of the gut microbiomes in
immunotherapy has provided significant impact on clinical therapeutics.
The immunologic status of the host, tumor invasion status, and biology
of malignancies are determining factors for individualized therapy.
Additional research on the microbiome will undoubtedly lead to the
earlier treatment of various cancers [22].

4.6. X chromosome and microRNA

MicroRNAs (miRNA) are small noncoding RNA molecules that possess
enormous regulatory powers. They play key roles in almost all
physiological pathways, and more so for our discussion, in the
pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases and cancers. Their genomic
distribution as previously described in Chapter 3 demonstrates their
highest density of sequences on the X chromosome. It is estimated that
miRNA regulate up to 50% of all protein-coding genes. Based on
“lyonization” or XCI (X chromosome inactivation) described back in
Chapter 1, this prodigious, complex embryologic (and evolutionary)
genomic process equips females with greater miRNA machinery than males
[23]—“for better and for worse” (pardon the pun).

In Chapter 5, we identified ways that XCI and its association with miRNA
serve as both phylogeny and ontogeny “paradoxical protection” for the
female against certain diseases. But how about mutations, dysregulation,
or dysfunction of miRNA biogenesis playing a key role in pathological
processes, particularly those of the immune system and oncogenesis?
Previous chapters have already demonstrated some of the multiple ways
this molecular biologic association contributes to the female
predilection for autoimmune diseases as well as cancer risks for both
males and females. Now let's consider some additional examples to
accentuate the profound influences (and paradoxes) this miRNA and X
chromosome amalgam produce.

The female immune system is flexible in its ability to counteract
infections and noninfectious diseases, including cancers. This
advantage, however, is yet again a paradox of the immune system in that
it can result in an increased susceptibility to developing autoimmune
diseases as we have described in Chapters 3 and 5. Meanwhile, a
significant number of X-linked miRNAs (e.g., miR-221, 222, 98, 532, and
more) help in regulating the immune system, but also have oncogenic
potential [24]. To add to this complex puzzle, there exist
miRNA-dependent, sex-specific clusters like the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway
(described below under Therapies) that can both regulate immune
responses and provide T-cell cancer immunosurveillance against tumors.
Relative to breast cancers, the most common cancer in women, a large
patient cohort study identified two circulating X-linked miRNAs
(miR-106a–363 and miR-532–502) as promising diagnostic biomarkers [25].
Continued research into this relationship of miRNA and carcinogenesis
will lead to the identification of new biomarkers for additional forms
of cancer.

5. Clinical presentations in cancers [26]

Cancer embraces a vast number and diversity of diseases that occur in
any organ system of the body. The pathological path for cancers is the
abnormal proliferation of cells different in type, numbers, and actions
of otherwise normal cells for the tissue or organ system in question.
The growth of cells can be rapid or slow. Cell accumulation can be
minuscule or massive.

5.1. Diagnosis

The ultimate clinical criteria for a cancer diagnosis are that the cells
in question are distinctly different (microscopically and macroscopic)
from the ordinary evolution, appearance, and proliferation of cells.
Thus, cancer differs from nonneoplastic cellular changes referred to as
hypertrophy (increase in the size of cells) and hyperplasia (increase in
cell number), where the cells involved are normal in appearance.

When cancer develops, the orderly cellular process breaks down. As cells
become more and more abnormal, old or damaged cells survive when they
should die, and new cells form when they are not needed. These extra
cells can divide without stopping and may form growths called tumors.
Many cancers form solid tumors, that are masses of tissue, whereas
cancers of the blood, such as leukemias, generally do not form solid
tumors. Cancerous tumors are malignant, which means they can spread
into, or invade nearby tissues. In addition, as these tumors grow, some
cancer cells can break off and travel to distant places in the body
through the blood or the lymph system and form new tumors far from the
original tumor. A cancer that has spread from the place where it first
started (primary site) to another place in the body is called metastatic
cancer. The process by which cancer cells spread to other parts of the
body is called metastasis. Diagnostic tests ranging from laboratory
studies to imaging to biopsy are all clinically indicated in a cancer
diagnosis (Table 6.3).

Cancer cells are also often able to evade the immune system, the network
of organs, tissues, as well as specialized cells that protect the body
from infections and other conditions. Although the immune system
normally removes damaged or abnormal cells from the body, some cancer
cells are able to “hide” from the immune system (see PDL-1 ligand
below). Tumors can also use the adaptive immune system (our “enemy”
again) to stay alive and grow. For example, with the help of certain
immune system cells that normally prevent a runaway immune response,
cancer cells can sometimes prevent the immune system from killing cancer
cells (a deadly paradox).

Besides a full examination, including comprehensive family and medical
history, the first diagnostic tests in a cancer diagnosis include biopsy
and imaging ranging from photography, through nuclear scanning, and
MRIs. Other more advanced diagnostic tests include transcriptomics (the
study of gene protein expression) and proteomics (the molecular biology
of the expressed proteins) to establish diagnostic markers for more
accurate diagnoses of cancers. Using global DNA gene expression data
derived from epigenetic experiments, genomic sequencing (see Chapter 3,
page 55) is now involved in cell type-specific regulation of gene
expression. This enables the development of “synthetic promoters” to
regulate gene activity and precisely control protein production.

 

Table 6.3

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1.  • Complete history and physical examination;                      |
| 2.  • Lab Tests                                                       |
|     -   ○ Blood levels for tumor markers produced by cancer cells;    |
|     -   ○ Urine, or other body fluids                                 |
| 3.  • Imaging Tests                                                   |
|     -   ○ CT Scan                                                     |
|     -   ○ MRI                                                         |
|     -   ○ PET scan                                                    |
|     -   ○ X-rays and Other Radiographic Tests                         |
|     -   ○ Nuclear Medicine Scans                                      |
|     -   ○ Ultrasound                                                  |
|     -   ○ Bone scan                                                   |
|     -   ○ Mammograms                                                  |
| 4.  • Biopsy                                                          |
| 5.  • Endoscopic examination:                                         |
|     -   ○ Bronchoscopy                                                |
|     -   ○ Colonoscopy                                                 |
|     -   ○ Cystoscopy                                                  |
|     -   ○ Laparoscopy                                                 |
|     -   ○ Laryngoscopy                                                |
|     -   ○ Mediastinoscopy                                             |
|     -   ○ Thoracoscopy                                                |
|     -   ○ Upper Endoscopy                                             |
| 6.  • Next-generation sequencing (NGS) oncology assays                |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

: Clinical diagnostic tests for cancer.

The tremendous variation in cancer cells, even within the same disease,
is one of the greatest challenges in cancer diagnosis. This is being
overcome through computerized artificial intelligence (AI) image
analysis that can identify different types of cancer cells simply by
scanning microscopic images. Results in AI scanning microscopy with
image recognition are achieving higher accuracy than previous human
judgment. In a dermatological study using 13,000 photographs to identify
malignant lesions, a trained AI convoluted neural network (CNN) program
yielded higher sensitivity and specificity than a panel of 21
board-certified dermatologists [27].

5.2. Staging [28]

Besides determining the nature and type of cancer in a diagnosis, one of
the most critical considerations in the clinical presentation is
“staging.” This is a determination of how advanced the cancer is
relative to its spreading (metastasis) beyond its original location. To
determine this, a number is assigned (I through IV) to characterize the
degree of spread (from local to disseminated, i.e., to other tissues
and/or organ systems beyond the original site). The higher the number,
the more cancer has spread locally or throughout the body. This
information is critical in determining a plan of treatment.

5.3. Types of cancers

Cancers are identified by the type of cells involved and the area of the
body from where they originate. Metastasis relates to the spreading of
the cells via blood or lymphatic system from their point of origin to
new sites of tumor development. The following terms define the general
types of cancers [29,30]

1.  • Carcinoma: cancer that starts in the skin or the tissues that line
    other organs;

2.  • Sarcoma: a cancer of connective tissues such as bones, muscles,
    cartilage, and blood vessels;

3.  • Leukemia: cancer of the bone marrow that creates blood cells;

4.  • Lymphoma: cancer that begins in lymphocytes (T cells or B cells):

5.  -   ○ Hodgkins lymphoma—from abnormal B cells (Reed-Sternberg
        cells);
    -   ○ Non-Hodgkin lymphoma—large, rapidly developing group from B
        cells or T cells.

6.  • Multiple myeloma: cancers that begin in plasma cells and form
    tumors in bone marrow (also called plasma cell myeloma and Kahler
    disease).;

7.  • Melanoma: cancer beginning in melanocyte (pigment forming) cells;

8.  • Other tumors:

9.  -   ○ Brain and spinal cord tumors;
    -   ○ Germ cell tumors;
    -   ○ Neuroendocrine tumors;
    -   ○ Carcinoid tumors.

6. Treatment considerations in cancer

The current era of cancer treatments share therapies common to
immunology, genetics, and genomics, many of which have been discussed in
Chapters 4 and 5. Used separately and in combination with
chemotherapies, radiation therapies, and surgery, the immunotherapies
and cellular genetic therapies we've been discussing are being viewed as
the hope of future successes in cancer treatments.

6.1. Chemotherapy [31]

Chemotherapy and radiation therapy differ from the immunotherapies and
cellular therapies in that the immunotherapies and cellular genetic
therapies use the body's own cells (and intrinsic biologic agents) to
treat itself. Conversely, chemotherapies utilize biochemical, toxic
chemical agents to target and destroy tumor and cancer cells throughout
the body. The problem with chemotherapy (and radiation therapy) is their
indiscriminate, adverse effects on healthy tissue and organ systems.

Various forms of chemotherapeutic agents effectively disrupt the stages
of irregular and rapid cancer cell development. Unfortunately, they are
not specific to the cancer cells alone and tend to disrupt normal cell
cycles as well, particularly the more susceptible cells of the
gastrointestinal tract and hair follicles, thus causing the nausea and
hair loss we all hear about and see in cancer patients.

When used with other treatments, chemotherapy can:

1.  • Make a tumor smaller before surgery or radiation therapy. This is
    called neoadjuvant chemotherapy;
2.  • Destroy cancer cells that may remain after treatment with surgery
    or radiation therapy. This is called adjuvant chemotherapy;
3.  • Help other treatments work better;
4.  • Kill cancer cells that have returned or spread to other parts of
    the body.

6.2. Radiation therapy [32]

Radiation therapy targets and attempts to destroy tumors and cancer
cells in specific areas of the body by using beams of intense energy to
kill the cancer cells. It most often uses X-rays, but protons or other
types of energy are now also being used with considerable success.
Radiation therapy is delivered by an external beam or by an internal
source (usually solid) placed near the tumor. At high doses, radiation
kills cancer cells or damages their DNA that causes the cancer cells to
stop dividing or die. This process could take days or weeks before DNA
is damaged sufficiently to destroy the cancer cells. Subsequently, the
cancer cells keep dying for weeks or months after radiation therapy
ends. Of course, the risk of damage from an external beam or internal
radiation to noncancer cells and tissue is a negative in radiation
therapies.

External beam radiation therapy is used to treat many types of cancer.
Brachytherapy is most often used to treat cancers of the head and neck,
breast, cervix, prostate, and eye. A systemic radiation therapy called
radioactive iodine, or I-131, is most often used to treat certain types
of thyroid cancer. Another type of systemic radiation therapy, called
targeted radionuclide therapy, is used to treat some patients who have
advanced prostate cancer or gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors
(GEP-NET). This type of treatment may also be referred to as molecular
radiotherapy.

6.3. Molecularly targeted therapies

Target therapies for cancer are similar to the immunotherapies that use
biologic agents for autoimmune diseases. The agents used differ from
chemotherapeutic drugs in that they interfere with specific “molecular
targets” that are involved in the growth, and the spread of cancer.
Targeted cancer therapies are sometimes called “molecularly targeted
therapies” and “precision medicines” by virtue of their target
specificity, similar to genetic therapies. As such, they are considered
cornerstones in the “precision medicine” concept [33]. Some of the FDA
approved target therapies include

1.  • hormone therapies;
2.  • signal transduction inhibitors;
3.  • gene expression modulators;
4.  • apoptosis inducers;
5.  • angiogenesis inhibitors;
6.  • immunotherapies;
7.  • checkpoint inhibitors.

6.4. Monoclonal antibodies

Many monoclonal antibodies (see also Chapter 2, page 39, Chapter 5, page
128 and Table 5.7, page 128) are used to treat cancer. They are a type
of targeted cancer therapy [34]. That means they are designed to
interact with specific targets. Targeted therapy is the foundation of
precision medicine. It is a type of cancer treatment that targets
proteins that control how cancer cells grow, divide, and spread. As
researchers learn more about the DNA changes and proteins that drive
cancer, they are better able to design promising treatments that target
these proteins.

Most targeted therapies are either “small-molecule drugs” (molecules
small enough to enter cells easily, so they are used for targets that
are inside cells) or monoclonal antibodies. Some monoclonal antibodies
are also immunotherapeutic because they help turn the immune system
against the cancer. For example, some monoclonal antibodies mark cancer
cells so that the immune system will better recognize and destroy them.
An example is rituximab that binds to a protein called CD20 on B cells
and some types of cancer cells, causing the immune system to kill them.

Other monoclonal antibodies called immune checkpoint inhibitors [35]
(see Chapter 5, page 130) bring T cells close to cancer cells, helping
the immune cells to kill the cancer cells. An example is blinatumomab
(Blincyto), that binds to both CD19, a protein found on the surface of
leukemia cells, and CD3, a protein on the surface of T cells. This
process helps the T cells get close enough to the leukemia cells to
respond to and kill them (Fig. 6.1). By the way, I hope you’re thinking
back to Chapter 1 when I mentioned a bunch of CD receptors which I
promised would come back, particularly in the cancer discussion. Promise
kept!

[ Figure 6.1  Monoclonal antibody binding to C19 and C3
receptors.Monoclonal antibody (blinatumomab [Blincyto]) binding to both
CD19, a protein found on the surface of leukemia cells, and CD3, a
protein on the surface of T cells. Source: National Cancer Institute,
National Institute of Health, U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services.]

6.5. Idiotype-Anti-idiotype Regulatory Circuit (or Loop)

Back in Chapters 2, 4, and 5, I referenced this topic, but kept
postponing its full discussion because of its complexity. But now,
because of its relevance regarding cancer, we have to take our best shot
at describing the “Idiotype-Anti-idiotype Regulatory Circuit (or Loop)”
with the goal of “… making it as simple as possible, but not simpler”
(Einstein). So, here goes.

This complex theory starts with part of an antibody (an “arm” of the “Y”
shape of antibodies) binding with a specific antigen. (Easy so far.)
Generated B cells (from the T _(H) cells) begin to produce genetically
cloned antibodies with unique profiles of idiotypic epitopes (called
idiotypes or antigen-binding sites for the cloned antibodies) that
increase immunogenic stimulation through neurotransmitters (chemical
bioregulators) [36]. These cloned antibodies begin producing an
abundance of B-idiotype cells. These B-idiotype cells generate the set
of epitopes (proteins that determine antigenicity) on the “V” region
(from the “Y”) of additional antibody molecules. (The “easy part” didn't
last too long, did it?) This stimulation induces antiidiotype and
anti-anti-idiotype antibodies (called antibody-2, antibody-3, and
beyond) that ultimately suppress continued stimulation by binding with
compatible Ts (Treg cells). This binding produces a regulatory
closed-loop suppressor system (or circuit) in the lymphoid system [37].
It provides antibodies that can eliminate a persistent antigen, like the
carcinogen or carcinogenic stimulus in the case of cancer
(Fig. 6.2—Diagram #9: which, by the way, completes the full immune
system flow diagram we started back in Chapter 1, Fig. 1.3. How's that
for “full circle?”). These antiidiotype antibodies have the potential to
provide long-lasting immunity as a vaccine for cancer [38] and COVID-19
[39]. And that's the big takeaway!

This “Idiotype-Anti-idiotype Regulatory Circuit (or Loop),” also
referred to as the “idiotype network theory (INT)” was discovered and
described by a Danish immunologist, N.K. Jerne, who was awarded the
Nobel Prize for medicine in 1984 for his work [40]. But, between you and
me, many scientists (myself included) still don't fully understand what
it all means (I told you it was complex!). But its potential benefits,
especially in future neurotransmitter mitigation therapies in autoimmune
diseases [41] (e.g., multiple sclerosis, myasthenia gravis) as well as
cancers and COVID-19 vaccine development, to our public health and
humanity definitely earn it a place in this discussion. Imagine, a
vaccine for cancer? You've gotta wonder what the “anti-vac luddites”
will say about that.

6.6. CAAR-T cell therapy or T-cell transfer therapy (gene replacement therapy)

Cancer immunotherapy is a rapidly growing field that has recently
demonstrated clinical efficacy in the treatment of solid tumors and
hematological malignancies [42]. Up to this point, we have described
numerous immunotherapeutic approaches developed to redirect and/or
augment immune functions against tumor cells. The application of
adoptive cell transfer therapy (ACT therapy – simply the transfer of
cells, usually immune cells [autologous – from self or allogenic – from
another], with the goal of improving immune function) for the treatment
of malignant cancers has now been expanded by the use of T lymphocytes
“engineered” to express chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) [43]. As
described in Chapter 5, page 137 and Fig. 5.4, chimeric autoantibody
receptor T cells (CAAR-T cells) are T cells that have been genetically
engineered to give them the new ability to target a specific autoantigen
protein. The receptors are “chimeric” because they combine both
antigen-binding and T-cell activating functions into a single receptor.
Similar to CAAR-T cell therapy, the basis of CAR-T immunotherapy is to
modify T cells to recognize, target, and destroy autoantigens as well as
cancer cells.

6.7. CAR-T cell therapy

As with CAAR-T cell therapy, CAR-T cell therapy (Fig. 6.3) begins by
removing a patient's lymphocytes and transducing them with a DNA plasmid
vector (a DNA molecule distinct from the cell's DNA used as a tool to
clone, transfer, and manipulate genes or stem cells) that encodes
specific tumor antigens. These modified and targeted lymphocytes are
then reintroduced into the patient's body (similar to CAAR-T) through a
single infusion to attack tumor cells [44]. This treatment has been in
used in cancer treatment for more than 25 years, resulting in four
generations of improving therapy that has generated effective
therapeutic responses for up to 4 years in some studies.

[ Figure 6.2  Idiotype-Anti-idiotype Regulatory Circuit (or
Loop)—Diagram #9.This regulatory closed-loop suppressor system (or
circuit) in the immune system provides a multiplication of cloned
antibodies (antibody-2, antibody-3, etc.) that can eliminate a
persistent antigen, such as the carcinogen or carcinogenic stimulus in
the case of cancer (you will note that this figure completes the immune
system flow diagram started with the APC diagram back in Chapter 1,
Fig. 1.3). Source: Louis J Catania © 2022. ]

[ Figure 6.3  Chimeric antigen receptor T-cells (CART-Ts).CAR-T-cell
therapy begins by removing a patient's lymphocytes and transducing them
with a DNA plasmid vector. These modified and targeted lymphocytes are
then reintroduced to the patient's body through a single infusion to
attack tumor cells. Source: National Institute of Health, U.S. Dept. of
Health and Human Services.]

There are currently two FDA approved CAR-T products used in cell
malignancies [45]. A recent report (February 2022) documented 2 patients
with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) treated with CAR-T therapy 10
years ago remain in remission. This suggests the therapy to be a “cure”
(remember how careful we have to be with that word) for CLL [46].

Based upon the high rates of initial cancer remission and durable
responses in many patients receiving CAR-T cell therapy, the ACT field
has expanded with CAR-T cell therapy now being applied against numerous
other B cell-associated antigens with encouraging clinical response data
being reported [47]. Again, as previously described about the
combination of stem cells with CRISPR-Cas9, so too can CAR-T cell
therapies be expanded in combination with CRISPR-Cas9 and stem cell
transplantation [48].

6.8. CAR-T cell therapy with CRISPR-Cas9

To increase the efficiency of the CAR-T cells, CRISPR-Cas9 (see
CRISPR-Cas9 description in Chapter 5, page 137) has been used to
increase their antitumor efficiency by disrupting a programmed death
(PD) receptor on the T cell [49]. Cancer cells carry a molecule called a
PDL-1 (a ligand, a molecule that binds to another molecule) that binds
to PD proteins on a T cells. This causes the T cell to think (bet you
didn't know that T cells think) that the cancer cells are “self” and
actually tricks the T cells into protecting the cancer (a little
anthropomorphizing to lighten the discussion). The theory is that
evolution (there's that 500-million-year thing again) promoted this
“pro-cancer” mechanism in our immune defense system to allow a handful
of cell mutations (from among the trillions during our lifetime) to
survive, produce malignancies and, for lack of a kinder phrase,
evolutionarily speaking, “cull the herd.” Thanks to immunotherapies,
chemotherapies, stem cell transplants, CRISPR-Cas9 and CAR-T cell
procedures, we're trying to reverse some of evolution's pernicious
efforts. Darwin would not be happy—unless, of course, he was fighting
cancer.

6.9. Combination strategies in cancer immunotherapy (immuno-oncology)

Back in Chapter 1, I promised to return to this (yet another) complex
topic, but I also promised to be brief. So, let me take a quick shot at
making this particular aspect of cancer therapies “as simple as
possible, but … yeah, yeah, you know.”

Cancer immunotherapy, also known as immuno-oncology, is form of cancer
treatment that uses the power of the immune system to treat and
hopefully, eliminate cancer. There are numerous forms of
immuno-oncology, many of which we have discussed above including
targeted antibodies, cancer vaccines, adoptive cell transfer, checkpoint
inhibitors, cytokines, biologics, gene therapies, and adjuvants
(treatments given in addition to the initial treatment, e.g., surgery,
chemotherapy, radiation, or targeted therapies). Combination therapies
with certain monoclonal antibodies effecting targeted immune checkpoints
have shown considerable promise in cancer therapies.

A research scientist with the MD Anderson [icon] Institute, Jim Allison,
Ph.D, yet another immunology Nobel Laureate (2018), invented immune
checkpoint blockade immunotherapy which blocks the cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) on T_(C) cells (more of that
stuff from Chapter 1), freeing these killer immune cells to attack
cancers. Blocking the CTLA-4 also liberates T cells to assume new
identities, including one that is vital to an effective response against
tumors [50]. CTLA-4 and programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1—see
description above), both inhibitory checkpoints commonly seen on
activated T-cells have been found to be the most reliable targets for
the treatment of cancer. Six drugs targeting PD-1 or its ligand PD-L1
(on the cancer cell) in combination with another drug targeting CTLA-4
have been approved for treatment of different types of cancers and
several others are in advanced stages of development [51]. Did you
get all that? Kinda?

The drugs, when administered as monotherapies, showed dramatic increase
in their durable response rates and had manageable safety profiles for
patients, but more than 50% of patients failed to respond to treatment.
Combining a combination of CTLA-4 and PD-1 blockers was then evaluated
to increase the response rates in patients, ipilimumab (Yervoy, an
anti-CTLA-4) plus nivolumab (Nivolumab [Opdivo], an anti-PD-1). In
combination they showed to significantly enhance efficacy in metastatic
melanoma patients. Subsequently, ipilimumab plus nivolumab was approved
for treatment of metastatic melanoma, advanced renal cell carcinoma, and
metastatic colorectal cancer. The success of such “combination
strategies” has encouraged multiple clinical studies in other cancer
types. The efficacy of combinations has been shown in a number of
published studies (some cited below) and more combination therapies are
under evaluation in multiple ongoing studies [52].

7. Brief research summaries on cancers

(Reference citations for each research study presented below can be
found in the corresponding footnote. Also, a listing of available
scientific reference sources and databases used by the author are
included in the book's Acknowledgments.)

(There are more literature reviews in this chapter than any other
because there is far more research going on in cancer than in any other
health-related field, particularly in AI-related research, an area of
great interest to moi, the author. But you'll also notice in Chapter 7
that COVID-19 research is rapidly catching up.)

-   1. As research progresses in many areas of cancer, AI continues to
    be one of the leading technologies being used to advance new
    information and understandings about the disease. Radiological
    imaging is one of the more exciting areas of AI's applications
    because of the strength of its graphic processing unit in analyzing
    imagery. CNNs (CNNs, AI algorithms) based models have demonstrated
    accuracies in the 80%–95% range for lung nodule detection and
    showing significant promise for lung cancer screening. Improvement
    in breast cancer screening with AI has also been an active area of
    investigation, resulting in an algorithm able to detect breast
    malignancy with a sensitivity of 90% [53].
-   2. In the field of radiogenomics, where radiographic image analysis
    is used to predict underlying genotypic traits, CNNs are being used
    with MRI scans to diagnose low-grade gliomas. Additionally, a
    radiomics signature using extracted features from CT data and a
    machine learning (ML) algorithm was able to predict underlying CD8
    cell tumor infiltration and response to immunotherapy for a variety
    of advanced cancers. In the area of translational oncology and
    complex proteomics data, deep learning (DL) neural networks are
    being used to predict protein structure, classify cells into a
    distinct stage of mitosis, and even predict the future lineage of
    progenitor cells based on microscopy images. In a clinical trial, DL
    artificial neural networks (ANNs) trained on transcriptomic response
    signatures to drugs accurately predicted the potential failure of
    over 200 sample drugs. And another ANN predicted cancer cell
    sensitivity to therapeutics using a combination of genomic and
    chemical properties [54].
-   3. Macrophage cells resist artificial receptors (viral, etc.) and
    thus, prepare them for cancer immunotherapy applications.
    Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania not only incorporated
    CARs with macrophages, they also unleashed their newly acquired
    firepower to kill tumors in human samples in the lab as well as in
    humanized mouse models. According to the researchers, their
    genetically modified macrophages—CAR macrophages—may prove to be
    especially useful in attacking solid tumors that often leave CAR-T
    cells exhausted and defeated. Macrophages eat invading cells rather
    than targeting them for destruction the way T cells do [55]. (See
    also the recent report regarding CAR-T therapy and leukemia on
    page 161. Happens to be the same UPenn research group.)
-   4. Regarding AI's role in cancer treatment, DL algorithms are
    showing significant value in predicting cancer treatment toxicity.
    Recently, a CNN approach was used to predict side effects of
    polypharmacy combinations based on databases of protein–protein and
    drug–protein interactions. This study led to the discovery of at
    least five novel drug interaction predictions. The use of AI to
    predict radiotherapy toxicity has generated significant interest as
    well over the past few years. Basic neural networks, CNNs, and other
    ML methods have been explored, using clinical data to predict
    urinary and rectal toxicity resulting from prostate radiotherapy
    results, hepatobiliary toxicity after liver radiotherapy, and rectal
    toxicity for patients receiving radiotherapy for cervical cancer
    [56].
-   5. Despite the impressive accuracy DL algorithms provide in cancer
    research, the unanswered question remains. How did it make its
    prediction? Currently, the ability to determine the precise logic
    behind DL-based predictions is lacking. This is often referred to as
    the “black box” problem. Further work is needed (“explainable AI”
    [XAI]) to better elucidate the decision-making logic with deep
    neural networks as AI is positioned to make “disruptive” changes in
    cancer care. It has shown promise in imaging diagnostics, treatment
    response evaluation, predicting clinical outcomes, drug development,
    and translational oncology. Overcoming issues of validation and how
    algorithms arrive at their conclusions will be necessary to harness
    the full potential of AI in cancer diagnosis, treatment, and cures.
-       A new generation is developing of continuously collected large
    data sets from various molecular profiling efforts (genetic,
    genomic, proteomic, epigenomic and others) of patient samples by
    wearable medical devices (“Internet of Things” or IoTs). Through
    these method, mobile health applications and clinical outcome data
    has enabled the biomedical community to apply AI and ML algorithms
    to vast amounts of data. The application of precision
    immunoprofiling by image analysis and AI to biology and disease was
    demonstrated in research papers where the authors used
    immunoprofiling data to effectively assess immuno-oncology
    biomarkers, such as PD-L1 and immune cell infiltrates as predictors
    of patient's response to cancer treatment [57].
-   6. The interplay between tumor and immune cells within the tumor
    microenvironment is increasingly important in the study of
    immuno-oncology. Before DL, algorithms for tissue image analysis
    were often biologically inspired in collaboration with pathologists
    and required computer scientists to handcraft descriptive features
    for a computer to classify a certain type of tissue or cell. ML
    allows for high-throughput generation of features that describe
    spatial relationships for thousands of cells, an infeasible task for
    pathologists. Improvements in individual cell and tissue detection
    via DL methods allow for very precise measurements of the tumor
    microenvironment, so heterogeneous features that describe spatial
    relationships between cells and tissue structures can now be
    measured at scale [58].
-   7. Kynurenine pathway enzymes have been identified as key regulators
    of cancer immunity. An AI with DL technology was employed to
    rationally design and discover a novel kynurenine pathway regulator
    with potent immunotherapeutic efficacy. The study demonstrated that
    AI modeling with DL is a valid strategy for a rational and effective
    development of an immunotherapeutic drug. This AI-based platform can
    be applied to other molecular targets to speed up the
    immuno-oncologic drug development [59].
-   8. AI technologies are starting to deliver promising results in
    different fields of aging and longevity research. The most important
    alterations of aging occur in the adaptive immune system and involve
    T cells. Many of these alterations are assumed to decrease capacity
    of the immune system to combat the emerging or progressing tumor.
    The declining function of the immune system is known as
    immunosenescence and leads to a higher incidence of infection,
    cancer, and autoimmune disease-related mortalities in the elderly
    population [60].
-   9. Several agents have been shown to induce and increase the immune
    response in many cancers. Checkpoint inhibitors have revolutionized
    cancer treatment and their success is mainly due to a durable immune
    response in cancer. The immune response is patient-specific and thus
    requires patient-specific treatment. AI can be utilized to predict
    patient responses and to come up with the right amount of inhibitors
    to be used. The presence of different immune cells makes the
    prediction difficult. Scientists have started developing algorithms
    that can predict immune cell population responses to different
    inhibitors and how the patient will respond [61].
-   10. Precision medicine is a valuable method being applied broadly
    for gaining insights into the genomic profile of tumor
    Next-generation sequencing (NGS). Simultaneously sequencing millions
    of DNA fragments in a single sample to detect a wide range of
    aberrations provides a complete profile of the tumor. The adoption
    of NGS for clinical purposes has grown tremendously due to the
    comprehensive detection of aberrations, combined with improvements
    in reliability, sequencing chemistry, pipeline analysis, data
    interpretation, and cost.
-       NGS supports the discovery of novel biomarkers, including
    mutation signatures and tumor mutational burden (TMB). Statistical
    analyses are performed, and patterns are discovered through millions
    of mutations detected by NGS. It is revolutionizing medical research
    and enabling multilayer studies that integrate genomic data of high
    dimensionality such as DNA-seq, RNA-seq. It uses multiomics data
    such as proteome, epigenome, and microbiome. The integrative
    analysis of multiomics data provides a better view of biological
    processes leading to a fuller understanding of these systems
    compared to single-layer analysis [62].
-   11. In the field of cancer genomics, the availability of multiomics
    data, genotype-phenotype data through genome-wide association
    studies, and literature mining have promoted the development of
    advanced AI techniques and solutions. This allows medical
    professionals to deliver personalized care through precision
    medicine. Precision medicine is a valuable method being applied
    broadly for gaining insights into the genomic profile of tumor NGS.
    Simultaneously sequencing millions of DNA fragments in a single
    sample to detect a wide range of aberrations provides a complete
    profile of the tumor. The adoption of NGS for clinical purposes has
    grown tremendously due to the comprehensive detection of
    aberrations, combined with improvements in reliability, sequencing
    chemistry, pipeline analysis, data interpretation, and cost. NGS
    supports the discovery of novel biomarkers, including mutation
    signatures and TMB. Statistical analyses are performed, and patterns
    are discovered through millions of mutations detected by NGS. It is
    revolutionizing medical research and enabling multilayer studies
    that integrate genomic data of high dimensionality such as DNA-seq,
    RNA-seq. It uses multiomics data such as proteome, epigenome, and
    microbiome. The integrative analysis of multiomics data provides a
    better view of biological processes leading to a fuller
    understanding of these systems compared to single-layer analysis
    [63].
-   12. Radiologic breast cancer screening has witnessed significant
    changes along with the successes of DL in the biomedical imaging in
    general. One such advancement, published in Radiology Journal, was
    developed by Rodriguez-Ruiz, et al. Authors compared radiologists'
    performances for reading mammographic examinations unaided versus
    aided (supported by an AI system) and revealed that radiologists
    improved their cancer detection performance at mammography when
    using an AI system. Results also indicated that this benefit was
    obtained without requiring additional reading time.
-       In a complementary study, the data from seven countries was
    curated by 101 radiologists. This broad experimental setting
    included a total of 2652 exams, and the stand-alone AI system was
    statistically similar to that of radiologists' interpretations. The
    sensitivity and specificity of the system were also found better
    than the majority of radiologists, but always worse than the best
    radiologist, which is not surprising. These results indicate that AI
    tools can be used in much broader settings that have never been used
    before in breast cancer diagnosis routine. However, for this to be a
    regular clinical practice, there is still an expectation that more
    experimentation should be done in both retrospective and prospective
    settings for independent validations [64].
-   13. Cancer immunotherapy has made promising strides as a result of
    improved understanding of biological interactions between tumor
    cells and the immune system. The recent emergence of quantitative
    imaging biomarkers provides promising opportunities. Unlike
    traditional biopsy-based assays that represent only a sample of the
    tumor, images reflect the entire tumor burden, providing information
    on each cancer lesion with a single noninvasive examination.
-       Computational imaging approaches originating from AI have
    achieved impressive successes in automatically quantifying
    radiographic characteristics of tumors. Radiomics-based biomarkers
    have shown success in different tumor types, but there is no
    evidence yet in immunotherapy. Tumor morphology, visualized on
    imaging, is likely influenced by several aspects of tumor biology.
    Findings suggest associations between radiomics characteristics and
    immunotherapy response showing consistent trends across cancer types
    and anatomical location. Lesions that are more likely to respond to
    immunotherapy typically tend to present with more heterogeneous
    morphological profiles with nonuniform density patterns and compact
    borders [65].
-   14. Dr. Elizabeth Krakow is using ML to develop precision cancer
    treatments at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle,
    WA. Dr. Krakow treats and studies leukemia patients who have
    relapsed after stem cell transplant. “Past treatments, the current
    complexity of the disease, side effects—all that info needs to be
    integrated to intelligently choose the new treatment,” says Krakow.
    Along with her team Dr. Krakow assembled medical data of 350 relapse
    patients, 1000 pages per patient. They built a machine-learning
    algorithm to predict the best treatment sequence for any patient, at
    any point in time. Her study will enable future work by creating a
    gold standard that will account for the sequential nature of cancer
    treatment, which clinical trials have failed to establish [66].
-   15. Data on cancer stem cell surface molecular markers from 27 of
    the most common cancer diseases were analyzed using natural language
    processing and data mining techniques. The source used for the
    search was 8933 full-text open-access English-language scientific
    articles available on the Internet. Text mining was based on
    searching for three entities within one sentence, namely a tumor
    name, the phrase “cancer stem cells” or its synonym, and a name of a
    differentiation cluster molecule. As a result, a list of molecular
    surface markers was formed that included markers most frequently
    mentioned in the context of certain tumor diseases. This study
    illustrates the interoperability of AI and ML, through data mining
    and NLP, to conduct research studies previously not obtainable
    through standard research protocols [67].
-   16. BCC is a skin cancer that develops most often on skin areas
    typically exposed to the sun (UV exposure most common cause—“my
    bad”), especially the face, ears, neck, scalp, shoulders, and back.
    It is characterized by an open sore that does not heal, and may
    bleed, ooze or crust. The sore might persist for weeks, or appear to
    heal and then come back. Sites are localized and destructive if not
    treated early. BCC rarely metastasizes and very rarely is fatal. An
    interesting AI study was conducted at Yale University to develop and
    validate a multi-parameterized ANN based on available personal
    health information for early detection of non-malignant skin cancers
    (NMSC) with high sensitivity and specificity, even in the absence of
    known UVR exposure and family history. A neural network (NN) was
    trained on 2056 NMSCs and 460,574 noncancer cases measuring 13
    parameters: gender, age, BMI, diabetic status, smoking status,
    emphysema, asthma, race-Hispanic ethnicity, hypertension, heart
    diseases, vigorous exercise habits, and history of stroke. The
    results (training sensitivity 88.5% and specificity 62.2%,
    validation sensitivity 86.2% and specificity 62.7%) were comparable
    to a previous study of basal and squamous cell carcinoma prediction
    that also included UVR exposure and family history information.
    These results indicate that an AI NN is robust enough to make
    predictions, suggesting that novel associations and potential
    predictive parameters of NMSC [68].
-   17. A study of colorectal cancer patients was conducted to
    investigate the effect of an automatic polyp detection system based
    on DL on polyp detection rate and adenoma detection rate ADR). Of
    1058 patients included, 536 were randomized to standard colonoscopy,
    and 522 were randomized to colonoscopy with computer-aided
    diagnosis. The AI system significantly increased ADR (29.1% vs.
    20.3%, P,0.001) and the mean number of adenomas per patient (0.5 vs.
    0.31, P,0.001). Besides, the number of hyperplastic polyps was also
    significantly increased (114 vs 52, P,0.001). This automatic polyp
    detection system during colonoscopy resulted in a significant
    increase in the number of diminutive adenomas detected, as well as
    an increase in the rate of hyperplastic polyps [69].
-   18. Scientists have developed a computer method that may help
    improve the understanding and treatment of Crohn's disease, The
    study used AI to examine genetic signatures of Crohn's in 111
    people. The method revealed previously undiscovered genes linked to
    the disease and accurately predicted whether thousands of other
    people had the disease [70].
-   19. A study was conducted to evaluate DL networks for predicting
    clinical outcomes by analyzing time-series CT images of patients
    with locally advanced non–small cell lung cancer. AI DL models using
    time series scans were significantly predictive of survival and
    cancer-specific outcomes. This demonstrates that DL can integrate
    imaging scans at multiple timepoints to improve clinical outcome
    predictions. AI-based noninvasive radiomics bio-markers can have a
    significant impact on the clinic given their low cost and minimal
    requirements for human input [71].
-   20. A study was conducted to evaluate the applicability of ML
    methods that combine data on age and prostate-specific antigen
    levels for predicting prostate cancer. Records of 943 patients who
    underwent transrectal ultrasonography-guided prostate biopsy were
    evaluated. A retrospective review of the patients' medical records,
    analyzed the prediction rate of prostate cancer and identified 20
    important features were compared with biopsy results using five
    different algorithms. Results suggest that the prediction rate of
    prostate cancer using ML methods may increase the detection rate for
    prostate cancer and reduce unnecessary prostate surgery [72].

Chapter highlights (key points and paradoxical-related information)

-   1. Cancer is not a noun, it’s a verb. Cancer is the expression of an
    irregular mutation of a gene (oncogenesis or “a genetic mistake”).
    With approximately 25,000 genes in our body mutating constantly,
    while 99.9% of them (author’s approximation) are destroyed by the
    innate and adaptive immune systems (cellular, humoral, phagocytosis,
    apoptosis), given the mathematical law of large numbers, it follows
    that “If you live long enough (or your luck runs out earlier),
    you’ll get cancer.” This is the theory of “cancering.”
-   2. Cancers are the second leading cause of death in America, second
    only to cardiovascular mortality. Unfortunately, COVID-19 has
    surpassed cancer in 2020 as the leading cause of death in the U.S.
-   3. Potential causes of oncogenesis (or carcinogenesis) include
    random genetic mistakes, epigenetics (modified genes), oncoevolution
    (p53 stimulated), infectious agents, (particularly viruses), the
    microbiome (“the second genome”), and/or the X chromosome (XCI and
    microRNA).
-   4. Types of cancers include carcinomas (soft tissue), sarcomas
    (connective tissue), leukemias (bone marrow and blood cells), and
    lymphomas (T and B lymphocytes), multiple myeloma (beginning in
    plasma cells and form tumors in bone marrow, melanoma (melanocytes),
    and some less popular miscreants.
-   5. Metastasis relates to the spreading of the cells via blood or
    lymphatic system from their point of origin to new sites of tumor
    development.
-   6. Cancer presents in “stages” (I though IV) which characterize the
    degree of spread (from local to disseminated). The higher the
    number, the more cancer has spread locally or throughout the body.
-   7. Treatment strategies in cancer include surgery, chemotherapies
    (utilizing biochemical, toxic chemical agents), and radiation
    therapies (X-rays and proton beam) that target and destroy tumor and
    cancer cells. The weakness to these therapies are that they are
    indiscriminate and adversely affect healthy tissue and organ
    systems.
-   8. “Molecular target therapies” for cancer are similar to the
    immunotherapies using almost identical biologic agents as used in
    autoimmune diseases (see Chapters 4 and 5). These agents (e.g.,
    hormones; signal transduction inhibitors; gene expression
    modulators; apoptosis inducers; angiogenesis inhibitors; and those
    from Chapter 5) interfere with specific “molecular targets” that are
    involved in the growth and the spread of cancer.
-   9. Most targeted therapies are either “small-molecule drugs”
    (molecules small enough to enter cells), monoclonal antibodies or
    checkpoint inhibitors.
-   
-   10. All of the therapeutic strategies mentioned in #7, 8, 9 above
    are often used effectively as combination therapies
    (immune-oncology) as well as with the genetic therapies mentioned in
    Chapters 4, 5, 6 (molecular biology therapeutic procedures [“genetic
    engineering” or “genetic modification”] including CAR-T and CAAR-T
    cell [replacement therapy], CRISPR-Cas9 [gene editing], and stem
    cell therapy [regenerative medicine]).

References

1. Hillis W.D. Edge master class 2010: W. Daniel Hillis on.  Cancer
(Phila) . October 19, 2019 [Edge.org].

2. Anandakrishnan R, Varghese R.T, Kinney N.A, et al. Estimating the
number of genetic mutations (hits) required for carcinogenesis based on
the distribution of somatic mutations.  PLoS Comput Biol
. 2019;15(3):e1006881.

3. Weinberg R.A. Cancer, mutations, and the facts of life. The
Guardian; 2019. weinberg@wi.mit.edu.

4. American cancer society facts & figures annual report for . 2018.

5. Cancer facts & figures . American Cancer Society; 2019.

6. NCHS Health E-Stats, .  National center for health statistics
. Center for Disease Control (CDC); 2019.

7. Ortaliza J, Orgera K, Twitter K.A, et al.  COVID-19 continues to be a
leading cause of death in the U.S. in September 2021 . KFF Health &
Wellbeing; October 13, 2021.

8. Siegel R.L, Miller K.D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2020.  ACS J
. January 8, 2020.

9. Global Burden of Disease 2019 Cancer Collaboration. Cancer incidence,
mortality, years of life lost, years lived with disability, and
disability-adjusted life years for 29 cancer groups from 2010 to 2019: a
systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2019.  JAMA
Oncol . 2021 Published online December 30.

10. Kuderer N.M, Choueiri T.K, Shah D.P, et al. Clinical impact of
COVID-19 on patients with cancer (CCC19): a cohort study.  Lancet
. 2020;395(10241):1907–1918.

11. Maringe M, Spicer J, Morris M, et al. The impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on cancer deaths due to delays in diagnosis in England, UK: a
national, population-based, modelling study.  Lancet Oncol
. 2020;21(8):P1023–P1034.

12. Genetic disorders . National Human Genome Research Institute. NIH.
USA.gov.; May 18, 2018.

13. Tomasetti C, Li L, Vogelstein B. Stem cell divisions, somatic
mutations, cancer etiology, and cancer prevention.  Science . September
22, 2017;355(6331):1330–1334.

14. Belikov A, Aleksey V. The number of critical carcinogenic events can
be predicted from cancer incidence.  Sci Rep . March 23,
2017;7(1):12170.

15. Ibid. Belikov. 14. May 18, 2018. USA.gov.

16. Genetics home reference. Tumor protein . NIH. National U.S. Library
of Medicine.; October 15, 2019:53. USA.gov.

17. Vande Voorde J, Balzarini J, Liekens S. Mycoplasmas and cancer:
focus on nucleoside metabolism.  EXCLI J . 2014;13:300–322.

18. Infectious agents . National Cancer Institute at the National
Institutes of Health; 2019.

19. Siegel R.L, Miller K.D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2020.  Ca Cancer
J Clin . 2020;70:7–30.

20. Jain T, Sharma P, Are A.C, Vickers S.M, Dudeja V. New insights into
the cancer–microbiome–immune axis: decrypting a decade of discoveries. 
Front Immunol . 2021;12:622064. .

21. Wu M, Bai J, Ma C, Wei J, Du X. The role of gut microbiota in tumor
immunotherapy.  J Immunol Res . August 6, 2021:5061570.

22. Choudhry H. The microbiome and its implications in cancer
immunotherapy.  Molecules . January 3, 2021;26(1):206.

23. Di Palo A, Siniscalchi C, Salerno M, et al. What microRNAs could
tell us about the human X chromosome [Published correction appears in
Cell Mol Life Sci.;78(8):4067].  Cell Mol Life Sci . April
2021;77(20):4069–4080.

24. Johnnidis J.B, Harris M.H, Wheeler R.T, et al. Regulation of
progenitor cell proliferation and granulocyte function by microRNA-223. 
Nature . February 28, 2008;451(7182):1125–1129.

25. Zou X, Li M, Huang Z, Zhou X, Liu Q, Xia T, Zhu W. Circulating
miR-532-502 cluster derived from chromosome X as biomarkers for
diagnosis of breast cancer.  Gene . January 5, 2020;722:144104.

26. Cancer Overview.  What is cancer staging? Cleveland Clinic . 2019.

27. Esteva A, Kuprel B, Novoa R.A, et al. Dermatologist-level
classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks.  Nature
. 2017;542:115–118.

28. Ibid. Cancer Overview. 26. Cleveland Clinic; 2019.

29. What do you want to know about cancer?  Healthline; 2019.

30. Cancer types . National Cancer Institute of NIH; 2019.

31. Cancer chemotherapy . MedLinePlus. NIH. USA.gov.; September 8, 2019.

32. Radiation therapy . MedLinePlus. NIH. USA.gov.; September 11, 2019.

33. Genetics Home Reference, .  What are some potential benefits of
precision medicine and the Precision Medicine Initiative? NIH . National
U.S. Library of Medicine. USA.gov.; October 15, 2019.

34. Targeted cancer therapies . National Cancer Institute. NIH; 23
September 2019.

35. Alteri R, Kalidas M.  Immune checkpoint inhibitors and their side
effects . American Cancer Society; December 27, 2019.

36. Stanova A.K, Ryabkova V.A, Tillib S.V, Utekhin V.J, et
al. Anti-idiotypic agonistic antibodies: candidates for the role of
universal remedy.  Antibodies . 2020;9(2):19.

37. Pan S.Y, Chia Y.C, Yee H.R, et al. Immunomodulatory potential of
anti-idiotypic antibodies of the treatment of autoimmune disease.  Futur
Sci . October 29, 2020;7(2).

38. Naveed A, Rahman S.U, Arshad M.I, et al. Recapitulation of the
anti-Idiotype antibodies as vaccine candidate.  Transl Med Commun
. March 1, 2018;3:1.

39. Naveed A, Naz D, Rahman S.U. Idiotype/anti-idiotype antibodies: as a
glorious savior in COVID-19 pandemics.  Transl Med Commun . 2021;6:18.

40. Kohler H, Pashov A, Kieber-Emmons T. The promise of anti-idiotype
revisited.  Front Immunol . 2019;10:808.

41. Baecher-Allan C, Kaskow B.J, Weiner H.L. Multiple sclerosis:
mechanisms and immunotherapy.  Neuron . February 21, 2018;97(4):742–768.

42. June C.H, O'Connor R.S, Kawalekar O.U, et al. CAR-T cell
immunotherapy for human cancer.  Science . 2018;359:1361–1365.

43. Gill S, June C.H. Going viral: chimeric antigen receptor T-cell
therapy for hematological malignancies.  Immunol Rev . 2015;263:68–89.

44. Wikipedia, .  Plasmids . September 23, 2019.

45. Porter D.L, Hwang W.-T, Frey N.V, et al. Chimeric antigen receptor
T cells persist and induce sustained remissions in relapsed refractory
chronic lymphocytic leukemia.  Sci Transl Med . 2015;7:303ra139.

46. Melenhorst J.J, Chen G.M, Wang M, et al. Decade-long leukaemia
remissions with persistence of CD4+ CAR T cells.  Nature . 2022.

47. Fry T.J, Shah N.N, Orentas R.J, et al. CD22-targeted CAR-T cells
induce remission in B-ALL that is naive or resistant to CD19-targeted
CAR immunotherapy.  Nat Med . 2017;24:20. .

48. Rupp L.J, Schumann K, Roybal K.T, et al. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated PD-1
disruption enhances anti-tumor efficacy of human chimeric antigen
receptor T cells.  Sci Rep . April 7, 2017;7(1):737.

49. Avior Y, Lezmi E, Yanuka D, et al. Modeling developmental and
tumorigenic aspects of trilateral retinoblastoma via human embryonic
stem cells.  Stem Cell Rep . 2017;8(D):1354–1365.

50. Leach D.R, Krummel M.F, Allison J.P. Enhancement of antitumor
immunity by CTLA-4 blockade.  Science . March 22,
1996;271(5256):1734–1736.

51. De Silva P, Aiello M, Gu-Trantien C, et al. Targeting CTLA-4 in
cancer: is it the ideal companion for PD-1 blockade immunotherapy
combinations?  Int J Cancer . July 2021;149(1):31–41.

52. Mokhtari R.B, Sambi M, Qorri B, et al. The next-generation of
combination cancer immunotherapy: epigenetic immunomodulators
transmogrify immune training to enhance immunotherapy.  Cancers
. 2021;13(14):3596.

53. McKinney S.M, Sieniek M, Godbole V, et al. International evaluation
of an AI system for breast cancer screening.  Nature . 2020;577:89–94.

54. Sun R, Limkin E.J, Vakalopoulou M, et al. A radiomics approach to
assess tumor-infiltrating CD8 cells and response to anti-PD-1 or
anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy: an imaging biomarker, retrospective
multicohort study.  Lancet Oncol . 2018;19:118091.

55. Klichinsky M, Ruella M, Shestova O, et al. Human chimeric antigen
receptor macrophages for cancer immunotherapy.  Nat Biotechnol
. 2020;38:947–953.

56. Ibragimov B, Toesca D, Chang D, et al. Development of deep neural
network for individualized hepatobiliary toxicity prediction after liver
SBRT.  Med Phys . 2018;45:4763–4774.

57. Tjoa E, Guan C.  A survey on explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI): towards medical XAI . Cornell University; October 15,
2019 arXiv:1907.07374 [cs.LG].

58. Vamathevan J, Clark D, Czodrowski P, et al. Applications of machine
learning in drug discovery and development.  Nat Rev Drug Discov
. 2019;18(6):463–477.

59. Lee W.S, Kim J.H, Lee H.J, et al. Artificial intelligence technology
enables a rational development of a potent immunotherapeutic agent. In: 
Proceedings of the annual meeting of the American Association for Cancer
Research . vol. 80. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; June 22, 2020 (16 Suppl.
l): Abstract nr 2092.

60. Pawelec G. Age and immunity: what is “immunosenescence”.  Exp
Gerontol . 2018;105:4–9.

61. Poleszczuk J, Enderling H. The optimal radiation dose to induce
robust systemic anti-tumor immunity.  Int J Mol Sci . 2018;19.

62. Steuer C.E, Ramalingam S.S. Tumor mutation burden: leading
immunotherapy to the era of precision medicine? 2017.  J Clin Oncol
. 2018;36:631–632 Available from:. https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.76.8770.

63. Pennell N.A, Mutebi A, Zhou Z.Y.  Economic impact of next generation
sequencing vs sequential single gene testing modalities to detect
genomic alterations in metastatic non-small cell lung cancer using a
decision analytic model . ASCO; 2018.

64. Rodríguez-Ruiz A, Krupinski E, Mordang J.J, et al. Detection of
breast cancer with mammography: effect of an artificial intelligence
support system.  Radiology . 2019;290:30514.

65. Trebeschi S, Drago S.G, Birkbak N.J, et al. Predicting response to
cancer immunotherapy using noninvasive radiomic biomarkers.  Ann Oncol
. 2019;30(6):9981004.

66. Keown S.  Using algorithms to personalize patient care  Dr.
Elizabeth Krakow, a blood-cancer specialist, and epidemiologist. Fred
Hutch News Service; October 1, 2018.

67. SuvorovYa R.E, Kim S.A, Gisina M, et al. Surface molecular markers
of cancer stem cells: computation analysis of full-text scientific
articles.  Bull Exp Biol Med . 2018;166(1):13540. .

68. Roffman D, Hart G, Girardi M, et al. Predicting non-melanoma skin
cancer via a multi-parameterized artificial neural network.  Sci Rep
. 2018;8(1):1701 Available
from:. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-19907-9.

69. Wang P, Berzin T.M, Romek J, et al. Real-time automatic detection
system increases colonoscopic polyp and adenoma detection rates: a
prospective randomized controlled study.  BMJ . 2019;68(10).

70. Wang Y, Miller M, Astrakhan Y, et al. Identifying Crohn's disease
signal from various analyses.  Genome Med . 2019;11(1).

71. Xu Y, Hosny A, Zeleznik R, et al. Deep learning predicts lung cancer
treatment response from serial medical imaging.  Clin Cancer Res . 2019.

72. Lee J, Yang S.W, Lee S, et al. Machine learning approaches for the
prediction of prostate cancer according to age and the prostate-specific
antigen level.  Korean J Urol Oncol . 2019;17.

7: Immunology

The science of pandemics, infectious disease and COVID-19

Abstract

The novel coronavirus, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)-CoV-2
originating in the City of Wuhan, China in December 2019 and spread
rapidly throughout China (an epidemic). Within 2months, it had spread
throughout the entire world becoming the pandemic labeled COVID-19. As
this chapter is being written (early 2021), this devastating disease
remains uncontrolled, causing countless and tragic death worldwide. The
life cycle of the virus including its spike protein and affinity to
ACE-2 receptors is well understood, but notwithstanding vaccines (Pfizer
and Moderna mRNA), antiviral drugs, and monoclonal antibodies just being
FDA approved (emergency use authorization—EAU), this highly contagious
agent continues to spread. Only classic public health preventive
measures like isolation, social distancing, masks, and copious
handwashing are effective, yet difficult to enforce with people and
politics in open societies. As with any pandemic, unless herd immunity
is achieved through an effective immunization program, identifying
infected individuals is critical. Antigen tests (polymerase chain
reaction) detect active viral infection while antibody tests identify
previously infected people who might be considered henceforth immune
(though inconclusive with SARS-CoV2). Perhaps the most valuable
information on the disease is coming from the enormous body of AI
assisted research of which this chapter addresses.

Keywords

ACE-2; Artificial intelligence (AI); Coronavirus; COVID-19; Herd
immunity; Monoclonal antibodies; mRNA; Pandemic; Polymerase chain
reaction (PCR); SARS-CoV-2; Spike protein; Vaccine

The secret of change is to focus all of your energy, not on fighting the
old, but on building the new.

Socrates

1. Introduction

This chapter is being written early in the year 2021. As we are all
painfully aware, the world was struck by a virulent and highly
contagious form of a coronavirus, referred to as the “novel coronavirus”
or SARS-CoV-2 at the end of 2019. During the months that followed, this
(Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome [SARS]-CoV-2) virus spread to create
a global pandemic referred to as COVID-19. It's a fortuitous coincidence
that this book is being written during an infectious pandemic and
published as the pandemic slowly (hopefully) regresses. Along with the
associated bioscience, epidemiology, and public health issues regarding
COVID-19, its most intimate relationship with science is with
immunology. It is without question the most relevant science addressing
such a pernicious disease and the biomedical, emotional, and mental
trauma it effectuates.

It's sad that any book (or chapter) related to something as calamitous
as a worldwide, infectious pandemic needs be written at all. The
coincidence, however, of such a book chapter written at a time that can
enlighten readers to the profound relationship immunology brings to this
human tragedy can't be overstated. It must be regarded as an opportunity
to provide humankind with yet a further understanding of “the paradox of
the immune system.” Its negative effects as “an enemy and villain”
produces clinical dilemmas, yet its applications as “our friend” gives
us a greater understanding of the virus and leads to the development of
vaccines to provide remedies and hope. Indeed, immunology will help us
restore our personal well-being and worldwide public health.

A reasonable understanding of a ubiquitous and “novel” viral infectious
disease, the nature of COVID-19 requires first a brief historical
background on contagious infections and pandemics. Then we will address
the pathogenesis of viral infections and specifically, the immunologic
and immunogenic mechanisms and theories of SARS-CoV-2, followed by the
clinical diagnostic and therapeutic considerations of coronavirus
infections. Finally, we will present and address the profound
epidemiologic and public health implications associated with the
COVID-19 global pandemic. Notwithstanding it being a fraction of the
body of literature already published on the topic, throughout this
Chapter and at the end, we will include reviews and research from the
ever-growing body of literature that is helping us better understand and
hopefully, eventually control this viral infectious pandemic and those
that inevitably will follow.

Much of the discussion in this chapter will have direct relationships to
the immunology and genetic information presented in previous chapters in
this book. The 2 greatest strengths I feel this Chapter brings to the
reader as compared to other COVID-19 literature are: (1) it provides an
organized summary of all the important and valuable information (to
date) you need to know regarding the immunology of the coronavirus,
infectious pandemics, and COVID-19 specifically; and (2) and perhaps its
greatest value is that the collective chapters of the book provide
immediate access to the most valuable, relevant immunological
information regarding COVID-19 for quick reference. This relevant
information (and its companion glossary of terms, not readily available
in many books or in most articles) provides a fuller understanding of
this critical subject for readers with backgrounds at any level of
science, immunology, or medical experience.

Finally, I dedicated this book with my deepest sympathy to those souls
lost during this COVID-19 pandemic, to their families, and to all those
in health care and their families who have sacrificed so much. Sometimes
words of appreciation fall short when there is so much suffering. But
all I can hope is that, in some small way, personally or professionally,
this literary contribution might help some of the heroes from this
pandemic who made such unselfish sacrifices. I sincerely thank them all.

2. Background considerations

2.1. Definitions

An endemic level of disease can be defined as that level of observable
disease found in a community and considered a baseline or expected
level. Occasionally, the expected level of disease may rise, often
suddenly, in a defined geographic area and is termed an “outbreak.” If
the rise in the cases is grouped in a specific place, it is considered a
“cluster,” but if they are broadly distributed, it is considered an
“epidemic.” Finally, a pandemic refers to an epidemic that has spread
over several countries or continents, usually affecting large numbers of
people (sound familiar?) [1].

Epidemics and pandemics occur when an infectious agent (e.g., a virus)
is sufficiently virulent and contagious enough to be conveyed to a large
number of susceptible hosts (humans). These conditions may result from:

1.  • A recent increase in amount or virulence of the agent;
2.  • The recent introduction of the agent into a setting where it has
    not been before;
3.  • An enhanced mode of transmission so that more susceptible persons
    are exposed;
4.  • A change in the susceptibility of the host response to the agent;
    and/or
5.  • Factors that increase host exposure or involve introduction
    through new portals of entry.

2.2. History of pandemics

2.2.1. Historical overview

Outbreaks of infectious disease have shaped the economic, political, and
social aspects of human civilization, their effects often lasting for
centuries. These outbreaks have defined some of the basic tenets of
modern medicine with the development of the principles of epidemiology,
prevention, immunization, and the field of public health. Throughout
history, pandemic outbreaks have decimated societies, determined
outcomes of wars, and wiped out entire populations. Yet paradoxically,
they have ushered in new innovations, created and advanced sciences
including medicine, immunology, genetics, and public health, as well as
fields of economics and political science systems.

The best-known examples of recorded plagues are those referred to in
religious writings starting with the Old Testament. The Athenian plague
is an historically documented event that occurred in 430–26 B.C. during
the Peloponnesian War. This plague affected a majority of the
inhabitants of the overcrowded city-state and claimed lives of more than
25% of the population. Subsequent plagues over the centuries affected
the Roman Empire (the Antonine plague), the Justinian plague, and
forward to 13th century and the Black Plague, a global outbreak of the
bubonic plague that originated in China in 1334, arrived in Europe in
1347, and over the following 50 years it reduced the global population
from 450 million to possibly below 300 million. Some estimates claim
that the Black Death claimed up to 60% of lives in Europe at that time
[2].

2.2.2. Recent history

Three influenza pandemics occurred at intervals of several decades
during the 20th century, the most severe of which was the so-called
“Spanish Flu” (caused by an A[H1N1] virus), estimated to have caused 20
to 50 million deaths in 1918–19. Milder pandemics occurred subsequently
in 1957–58 (the “Asian Flu” caused by an A[H2N2] virus) and in 1968 (the
“Hong Kong Flu” also caused by an A[H3N2] virus), that were estimated to
have caused one to four million deaths each.

Polio (classified as an epidemic) occurred in the United States from
1916 to its peak in 1952. Of the 57,628 reported cases, there were 3145
deaths. Dr. Jonas Salk developed a vaccine and in 1962, the average
number of cases dropped to 910. The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) Trusted Source reports that the United States has been
polio-free since 1979. Unfortunately, there have been recent reports of
new cases of polio developing in industrialized and developing countries
[3].

The first influenza pandemic of the 21st century occurred in 2009–10 and
was caused by an influenza A(H1N1) virus. This H1N1 pandemic was a
reprise of the “Spanish flu” pandemic from 1918, but with far fewer
devastating consequences. Suspected as a reassortment of bird, swine,
and human flu viruses, it was coined the “swine flu.” For the first
time, a pandemic vaccine was developed, produced, and deployed in
multiple countries during the first year of the pandemic. While most
cases of pandemic H1N1 were mild, globally it is estimated that this
2009 pandemic caused between 100,000 and 400,000 deaths in the first
year alone. Other prominent epidemics and pandemics that occurred in the
early 21st century included Ebola, Lassa fever, Middle East respiratory
syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), Nipah and henipa viral diseases, Zika,
and others.

The first outbreak of SARS was at the start of the 21st century. It was
caused by the SARS Corona virus (SARS-CoV-1) and started in China. It
affected fewer than 10,000 individuals, mainly in China and Hong Kong,
but also in other countries, including 251 cases in Canada (Toronto).
The severity of respiratory symptoms and mortality rate of about 10%
caused a global public health concern. Through the vigilance of public
health systems worldwide, the outbreak was contained by mid-2003. This
certainly is a sad statement when considering the virtually uncontrolled
evolution and spread of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic being experienced during
the second decade of the 21st century. How can we have let it happen?
The novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2), being more contagious than the
SARS-CoV-1, was allowed to spread uncontrolled because of inadequate
attention (personal responsibility and political accountability—aka
“total insanity!”) to the simplest cardinal rules of public health to
controlling infectious disease, that is, testing, quarantine, social
distancing, copious hygiene (hand-washing), wearing masks, and contact
tracing. Such a sad statement has resulted in otherwise avoidable,
unimaginable human suffering [4].

2.3. HIV and AIDs [5]

Among the most serious pandemics of the 20th and 21st century is (note
the use of the present tense) the human immunosuppressive virus (HIV)
first documented in 1981. The pandemic first appeared to be a rare lung
infection originating in Africa. Now it is known that it damages the
body's immune system and compromises its ability to fight off
infections. Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is the final
stage of HIV and the sixth leading cause of death in the United States
among people 25–44 years old. While no cure currently exists, treatments
(antiretroviral therapy [ART]) have been developed and the number of
deaths has fallen to 19% since 2005.

Second only to COVID-19, HIV is considered one of the world's most
serious health and development challenges since the first cases were
reported in 1981. As of 2020, approximately 76 million people have
become infected with HIV since the start of the epidemic. There are
approximately 38 million people currently living with HIV, and 10s of
millions of people have died of AIDS-related causes since the beginning
of the epidemic. Considered an epidemic in the U.S., its worldwide
distribution qualifies it as a pandemic as well. Whatever the case, stop
and consider what these facts lay bare. In the year 2021, we are living
with two active pandemics and no less than four in the past two decades.
Biologists estimate that 380 trillion (10³⁸) viruses are living on our
planet, land and sea, and inside our bodies right now—10 times the
number of bacteria [6]. Given that fact, it doesn't take much
imagination to realize that we will be living with infectious pandemics
for a long, long time. Such a thought raises the Santayana adage that
“those who do not remember the past are condemned to repeat it.” We can
only hope that the science skeptics (and no less the climate crisis
deniers) finally wake up and help us shape a future for our children,
their children, and for all humanity.

2.3.1. The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)

HIV is a virus that attacks the T_(H) (or CD4) cells that help the body
fight infection, making a person more vulnerable to other infections and
diseases. It is spread by contact with certain bodily fluids of a person
with HIV, most commonly during unprotected sex (sex without a condom or
HIV medicine to prevent or treat HIV), or through sharing injection drug
equipment. As with other viruses, the human body can't get rid of HIV
and no effective HIV cure exists. So, once you have HIV, you have it for
life. However, by taking HIV medicine like ART [7], people with HIV can
live long and healthy lives and prevent transmitting HIV to their sexual
partners. In addition, there are effective methods to prevent getting
HIV through sex or drug use, including preexposure prophylaxis and
postexposure prophylaxis.

2.3.2. Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome

If left untreated, HIV can lead to the disease AIDS (acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome). AIDS is the late stage of HIV infection that
occurs when the body's immune system is badly damaged because of the
virus. In the U.S., most people with HIV do not develop AIDS because
taking HIV medicine every day as prescribed stops the progression of the
disease.

A person with HIV is considered to have progressed to AIDS when [8]

1.  • the number of their CD4 cells falls below 200 cells per cubic
    millimeter of blood (200 cells/mm3). (In someone with a healthy
    immune system, CD4 counts are between 500 and 1600 cells/mm3.) or
2.  • they develop one or more opportunistic infections regardless of
    their CD4 count.

Without HIV medicine, people with AIDS typically survive about 3 years.
Once someone has a dangerous opportunistic illness, life expectancy
without treatment falls to about 1 year. HIV medicine (ART) can still
help people at this stage of HIV infection, and it can even be
lifesaving. People who start ART soon after they get HIV experience more
benefits, that's why HIV testing is so important.

3. Incidence and prevalence of COVID-19

Originating in the City of Wuhan, China in December 2019, the novel
coronavirus spread rapidly throughout China (epidemic) and within
2 months, it had spread throughout the entire world becoming a pandemic
labeled COVID-19. At the time of this writing (early 2021), this
pandemic had spread to 213 countries and territories and has escalated
to greater than 112 million reported cases and greater than 2.5 million
deaths worldwide. In the United States, the rate of infection is greater
than 28.6 million cases or 25.5% of the worldwide total and greater than
508,000 deaths or 20.3% of the world's total (statistics as of March
2021 [9,10]). Unfortunately, I anticipate that readers of this chapter
will look back upon these numbers and their escalation as a regrettable
measure of the lack of compliance with the necessary public health
concurrence.

In the United States, COVID-19 has already become the number three
leading cause of death in 2020, just behind heart disease and cancer.
(As stated in  Chapter 6 , during final proofing of this manuscript
[late 2021], new report indicated that statistic having grown to over
700,000 deaths making it the leading cause of death in the U.S, How sad
to have ever let that happen [ 11 ]). During the pandemic, the CDC
reported that life expectancy dropped by at least a full year during the
first half of 2020 (men saw a drop of 1.2 to 75.1 years, while women saw
a decrease of 0.9 years to 80.5), the greatest drop since World War II
and COVID-19 mortality rate more than doubled over the subsequent
12-month period. There is little doubt that when you read this book,
these case numbers and mortality rates will have grown substantially,
hopefully less than currently predicted. However, as improved viral
controls (i.e., vaccines and antiviral drugs) become more available (a
good thing), there seems to be an ominous increase in “super spreader”
events (a bad thing) worldwide with large crowd gatherings in close
proximity, not wearing masks, as well as some governments (state and
national) disregarding necessary restrictions. Such ignorance of the
need for public health preventive measures can only lead to increased
disaster. (It's just so frustrating to see the politicization of such a
public health crisis.)

3.1. Viral mutations

Mutations are the changes in the structure of the DNA or RNA of a gene,
resulting in a variant form of the genome that may be transmitted to
subsequent generations. Most microorganisms are based on a DNA genome.
Some viruses, including the coronavirus, have RNA-based genomes instead.
In general, viral RNA genomes are much more mutation-prone than those
based of DNA. This distinction is important because RNA-based viral
mutations have a greater potential for increased virulence, greater
transmissibility, and worst of all, producing a resistance to drugs. So
oftentimes, a vaccine developed for a particular viral genome becomes
ineffective for its mutated variant. Such is the concerns with the
variants developing in the SARS-CoV-2 virus.

As the prevalence of coronavirus increases across the planet, there is
concern for any factors that might increase the transmissibility and
severity of infection. Different variants are evolving from “mutations”
of the viral genome. Evidence of this has been discovered in a number of
countries (UK, South Africa, Brazil, and the U.S.) so far. The CDC
described a variant strain of SARS-CoV-2 that was discovered in parts of
the UK (specifically the South East), that accounted for 60% of
infections in London. Studies have shown that some variants spread more
quickly than others. The 614G sequence variant demonstrates a mutation
in the virus's spike protein (more on this below), representing a
potential risk of worsening the pandemic. Other variants have been
associated with higher rates of infectivity (e.g., the delta variant and
a rapidly evolving omicron variant).

Public Health of England has said there is no evidence new variants
tested are resistant to the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine, that is now being
given across the country to high-priority groups such as healthcare
workers. Nor is there any indication at this point of increased
infection severity associated with the new variants (although this is
being refuted now in more studies in multiple countries). A new South
African variant (omicron) identified in the United Kingdom is considered
completely different from the UK variants and seems to spread more
easily and quickly than other variants discovered so far. The CDC
announced in November 2020 that it had launched the National SARS-CoV
Strain Surveillance (NS3) program to help track the viruses undergoing
mutation characterization. The CDC stated that there is currently no
evidence that the variants discovered so far that can cause more severe
illness or increased risk for death.

4. Pathogenesis, immunologic, and immunogenic considerations for SARS-CoV-2

4.1. Mechanisms

Viruses are not living cells or organisms. They are obligate parasites
or nonliving organisms that lack metabolic machinery of their own to
generate energy or to synthesize proteins. Rather, they require a living
host to exploit or infect (enter) so they can replicate to complete
their life cycle (see Fig. 7.1 and Life Cycle below). The invading virus
uses either its genomic DNA or RNA to replicate in the host cell.
Coronaviruses (CoV) are a family of RNA viruses that typically cause
mild respiratory disease in humans. They include MERS-CoV and
SARS-CoV-1, thought to be driven by the spillover of bat-adapted CoVs
into an intermediate host (see below). The novel coronavirus
(SARS-CoV-2) is a single positive-strand RNA virus that is the largest
genome known. Thus, these viruses are poorly adapted to the human host
and if transmitted to humans (e.g., SARS-CoV-2), they are generally
associated with more severe clinical presentations. Also, if infection
occurs (and subsequent mutations), it can be highly transmissible from
person to person as SARS-CoV-2 has demonstrated [12].

Coronavirus disease leads to fast activation of innate immune cells,
especially in patients developing severe disease. Innate immune
activation, levels of many proinflammatory effector cytokines (e.g.,
TNF, IL-1b, IL-6, IL-8, G-CSF [granulocyte colony-stimulating factor]
and GM-CSF [granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor]), as well
as higher levels of chemokines (e.g., MCP1, IP10, and MIP1α) are also
found in those who are critically ill. The levels of some T cell-derived
cytokines (e.g., IL-17) are also increased. Often with these cytokines,
a “cytokine storm” develops that triggers a hyperinflammatory state. As
stated above and in Chapter 4 on chronic inflammation (the progenitor of
all disease), this inflammatory clinical response leaves virtually all
organ systems vulnerable to adverse effects from the novel coronavirus
[13]. Of increasing concern are the cardiovascular effects resulting
from perivasculitis (inflammation of the adventitia and endothelial
lining of blood vessel walls—see Chapter 4, page 76). Antiinflammatories
(corticosteroids) and cytokine inhibitor drugs (e.g., checkpoint
inhibitors, IgG, Interleukin six blockers) are being studied and
beginning to show some benefits in advanced cases and late-stage disease
[14].

[ Figure 7.1  SARS-CoV-2 life cycle.The life cycle of the novel
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) begins when its spike protein attaches to an
ACE2 receptor on a cell membrane (1) and penetrates the cell wall where
it replicates a genomic RNA (2–4), then produces “subgenomic RNAs”
(5–6), synthesizes various spike proteins through translation (7) and
new genomic RNA becomes the genome of a new virus particle (8). This
combines with the strand genomic RNA, merges in the endoplasmic
reticulum-Golgi apparatus into a complete virus particle within a
vesicle (9), and the new viral particles are released (exocytosis) to
the extracellular region (10). Shereen MA, Khana S, Kazmi A, et al.
COVID-19 infection.]

4.2. Life cycle of SARS-CoV-2

The pathogenesis and life cycle of SARS-CoV-2 includes a complex of RNA
genomic transfers and regenerations to produce the proliferation of the
virus. The extracellular and intracellular (host cytoplasm) process
involved is illustrated in Fig. 7.1 and traced through the following
steps. I think you will be able to follow the “bouncing ball” through
this life cycle and the illustration may (or may not) help. If you're
completely flummoxed by the whole thing, don't worry. Just wear your
mask, get vaccinated and you'll never need to know the difference
between a nonstructural protein from a ham sandwich (rich in protein, I
might add).

-   1. When the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 binds to the ACE-2 receptor
    (described below) of the host cell, the virus enters the cell;
-   2. Then, the fatty envelope of the virus is peeled off by the host
    ribosome that releases the viral genomic RNA into the cytoplasm of
    the cell;
-   3. The ORF1a and ORF1b (genes) RNAs are produced by genomic RNA and
    then translated into pp1a and pp1b proteins, respectively;
-   4. Protein pp1a and ppa1b are cleaved by protease (proteolysis) to
    make a total of 16 nonstructural proteins;
-   5. Some of the nonstructural proteins form a
    replication/transcription complex (RNA-dependent RNA polymerase,
    RdRp), that use the (+) strand genomic RNA as a template (see
    Chapter 3, page 51 for transcription and translation explanation);
-   6. The (+) strand genomic RNA produced through the replication
    process becomes the genome of a new viral particle;
-   7. Subgenomic RNAs produced through transcription are translated
    into structural proteins (in the diagram: S: spike protein, E:
    envelope protein, M: membrane protein, and N: nucleocapsid protein)
    that form a viral particle;
-   8. Spike, envelope, and membrane proteins enter the endoplasmic
    reticulum of the cell, and the nucleocapsid protein is combined with
    the (+) strand genomic RNA to become a nucleoprotein complex;
-   9. This complex merges into the complete virus particle in the
    endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi apparatus compartment; and
-   10. The new viral particles are released (exocytosis) to
    extracellular regions through the Golgi apparatus and the vesicle.

(Chapter 3 may have aided in your understanding of this step-by-step
life cycle explanation and may have added to your genomic knowledge
base. If you got even half of all that, you're way ahead of 99% of the
world's population.)

4.3. Theories

Several studies suggest that antibodies against non-SARS-CoVs are highly
prevalent in the general population including children, suggesting that
many or most individuals have been infected by CoVs in the past and have
potentially developed a certain degree of (protective) immune response
[15]. The severity and the clinical picture in many patients could even
be related to the activation of an exaggerated immune mechanism
(“cytokine storm”), causing uncontrolled inflammation, akin to
autoimmune disease (i.e., the immune system as “Enemy #2”). The
hypothesis that SARS-CoV-1 (or other, antigenically similar CoV-1) has
silently infected a significant proportion of the population, inducing
“herd immunity” (see “Treatment and management strategies” below) needs
to be confirmed. Indeed, immunity against the infection, or patterns of
semiimmunity (capacity of the immune system to avoid severe infection)
may be due to cellular immunity rather than proinflammatory humoral
immune responses [16]. Animal models suggest that the efficiency of T
lymphocyte-mediated immune responses (see Chapter 2, page 31) is also
pivotal for controlling SARS-CoV infections [16]. (Lots of stuff from
Chapters 1 and 2 resurfacing here.)

Within 19 days after symptom onset, a total of 100% of 285 patients with
COVID-19 tested positive for antiviral immunoglobulin-G (IgG).
Seroconversion for IgG and IgM (transition of the test results for IgG
or IgM against SARS-CoV-2 from negative to positive results in
sequential samples) occurred simultaneously or sequentially. Both IgG
and IgM titers plateaued within 6 days after seroconversion [17]. Thus,
serological testing may be helpful for the diagnosis of suspected
patients with negative reverse-transcriptase–polymerase-chain-reaction
(RT–PCR) (an antigen diagnostic test—see below) results and for the
identification of asymptomatic infections.

There is currently no data on the specific role of either humoral or
cellular immunity or innate immunity in patients recovering from
COVID-19. T lymphocytes responsible for clinically relevant antiviral
immune responses have a significant chance to be locally present in, or
close to, respiratory epithelia. It is very possible that the exclusive
detection of humoral immunity against SARS-CoV-2 leads to an
underestimation of the anti-SARS-CoV-2 immune responses. It becomes
plausible that, after infection by SARS-CoV-2, a sort of race decides
the course of the events. Either a cellular innate immune response
rapidly clears SARS-CoV-2 without any (or mild) clinical signs of
infection or the virus causes a state of immunosuppression that
debilitates and sometimes overwhelms the host's (human) defense [18].

4.4. Natural pathogenesis (theorized)

Researchers have analyzed genomic data related to the overall molecular
structure of the new coronavirus. Their testing has traced this novel
coronavirus to a strain of Malaysian anteater (pangolin) containing
genomic regions that are very closely related to the human virus. Their
analysis showed that the genome resembles that of a bat coronavirus
discovered after the COVID-19 pandemic began. However, in “SARS-CoV-2
testing,” the binding region of the spike protein resembles the novel
virus found in pangolins (anteaters). This provides additional evidence
that the coronavirus that causes COVID-19 almost certainly originated in
nature, most likely in bats [19] with an intermediate animal (anteater
or monkey?) host and ultimately transmitted to humans (“zoonotic
spillover”) [20]. This genetic information concludes that “coronaviruses
clearly have the capacity to jump species boundaries and adapt to new
hosts” (virus recently reported in Malaysian tigers in Bronx Zoo [21]).
This information makes it predictable that more will emerge in the
future. This phenomenon could be a serious ongoing treat when
considering the reverse, human to animal (anthroponotic) transmission
that is now being reported with increased frequency. Reports include
common pets (including dogs and cats) though rare, multiple species, and
familial primate species (homids) that interact with humans in zoos
(gorillas, orangutans, chimpanzees, and bonobos) [22].

Most important among these findings is the receptor binding domain
(spike protein) that dictates how the virus is able to attach and infect
human cells (see Life cycle above). This comparative analysis of genomic
data dispelled the postulate that the virus was laboratory constructed
or was a “manipulated” virus. Rather, it promotes a lesson learned to
reduce human exposure to wildlife and to ban the trade and consumption
(e.g., “wet markets” in China) of wildlife. However, as not all of the
early COVID-19 cases were wet market associated, it is possible that the
emerging story is more complicated than first suspected.

4.5. Genetic and genomic considerations

The genomic data of the new coronavirus responsible for COVID-19 show
that its spike protein contains some unique adaptations. One of these
adaptations provides special ability of this coronavirus to bind to a
specific protein on human cells called angiotensin converting enzyme
(ACE-2) [23]. Human ACE-2 is expressed in epithelial cells of the lung
and serves as an entry receptor site for SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. ACE-2
genetic polymorphism (occurrence of different forms in the life cycle of
an individual organism) represented by diverse genetic variants in the
human genome has been shown to affect virus-binding activity suggesting
a possible genetic predisposition to COVID-19 infection. Thus, analysis
of genetic variants and genome sequencing from asymptomatic, mild or
severe COVID-19 patients should be performed to classify and predict
people based on their vulnerability or resistance to potential COVID-19
infection [24]. Genome sequencing is also critical in determining new
variants of the virus among the infected population.

The entire genome of the 2019-novel coronavirus is more than 80% similar
to the previous human SARS-like bat CoV [25]. Thus, previously used
animal models for SARS-CoV can be utilized to study the infectious
pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2. CRISPR-mediated (see CRISPR, Chapter 6,
page 168 and below) genetically modified hamsters or other small animals
can be utilized for the study of the pathogenicity of novel
coronaviruses.

Finally, an interesting finding was made among SARS-CoV-2-infected
patients. Researchers found a haplotype (a group of genes inherited
together from a single parent) on chromosome 12 that reduces the risk of
severe Covid-19 infection. This genetic mutation is associated with
about a 22% reduction in relative risk of becoming severely ill with
COVID-19 when infected by SARS-CoV-2. This region encodes proteins that
activate enzymes (proteases) that are important during infections with
RNA viruses. The genetic region involved affects the body's immune
response to RNA viruses such as the coronavirus. This is a mutation that
has been passed down over the millennia because it is assumed to help
people survive the frequent viral infections among humans [26]. It
reminds me of the negative evolutionary correlate we spoke about back in
Chapter 6 (page 168) regarding the “pro-cancer” programmed death protein
on the T cell. That one was theorized as “culling the herd” while this
one seems to promote phylogeny (evolutionary history of a species).
Don't you wish “natural selection” and Darwinism would make up its mind?

4.6. Autoantibody rogue B-cell association with COVID-19 [27]

As mentioned in Chapter 5, late in the proofreading portion of this
manuscript (late 2021), new findings were revealed regarding the
association of memory B cells (MBCs), aka autoantibody rogue B-cells,
with late COVID-19 infections. Researchers at Rockefeller University,
Yale University and international research teams [28] detected these
autoantibodies that could neutralize and lower, relevant concentrations
of interferons. Their initial studies included 3595 patients with
critical COVID-19 that were confirmed among individuals admitted to an
intensive-care unit with advanced COVID-19 infections. Overall, 13.6% of
these patients possessed autoantibodies, with the proportion ranging
from 9.6% of those below the age of 40, up to 21% of those over 80.

This cohort study indicated that around 10% of people with severe
COVID-19 had autoantibodies that attack and block type 1 interferons and
their critical role in fighting off viral infections. Further studies on
35,000 blood samples of healthy in patients found an increase in B-cell
autoantibodies against type 1 interferon ranged from 9.6% in patients
below age 40 up to 21% in patients over 80. Autoantibodies were also
present in 18% of people who had died of the disease. This massive
increased prevalence in patients over 80 largely explains the high risk
of severe COVID in people in the elderly population. These studies seem
to indicate that rogue B-cell autoantibodies are a cause, rather than a
consequence, of critical COVID-19.

5. Clinical considerations for coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) infection

5.1. Clinical manifestations (signs and symptoms)

Reported illnesses with the novel coronavirus have ranged from mild
symptoms to severe illness and death for confirmed COVID-19 cases. The
symptoms may appear 2–14 days after exposure (based on the incubation
period of SARS-CoV viruses). As with any infectious disease, the array
of symptoms can vary considerably, but there are eight cardinal symptoms
in adults and children (and other possibilities) which are the defining
complex of the clinical disease [29], including:

  In adults:                 In children (age 5 to 17):   Other possible symptoms:   
  -------------------------- ---------------------------- -------------------------- -------------------------
  1. Loss of taste;          1. Loss of taste             1. Severe fatigue;         9. Sore eyes;
  2. Loss of smell;          2. Loss of smell;            2. Heavy arms/legs;        10. Sneezing;
  3. Fever;                  3. Fever;                    3. Tightness in chest;     11. Diarrhea;
  4. New persistent cough;   4. Headache;                 4. Hoarse voice;           12. Sore throat;
  5. Shortness of breath;    5. Shortness of breath;      5. Nasal congestion;       13. Difficult sleeping;
  6. Chills;                 6. Chills;                   6. Dizziness;              14. Abdominal pain
  7. Loss of appetite;       7. Loss of appetite;         7. Chest pain;             15. Numbness/tingling
  8. Muscle aches.           8. Muscle aches.             8. Nausea and vomiting     

[image]

Elderly and immune compromised patients are at greater risk for
contracting the virus and for poor outcomes. However, significant
numbers of young and healthy people are also being reported with severe
infections, though generally with better outcomes. Spread occurs through
respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby
or possibly be inhaled into the lungs [30].

Older age, obesity, and comorbidities have consistently been reported as
the greatest risk factors for unfavorable prognosis or protracted
disease, called “post-COVID syndrome,” “long COVID,” or “long haulers
syndrome.” [31] This syndrome however, is found in a full range of
COVID-19 patients, with symptomatology ranging from severe to
nonexistent. The syndrome itself includes all sorts of problems with
inflammatory responses in the brain (“brain-fog”), around the heart
(myocarditis), around the nerves (neuropathies), around the muscles
(myosititis), etc. It's clear that in addition to the immediate clinical
effects of SARS-CoV-2, the novel coronavirus can have long-term
manifestations, experts say [32]. Less clear so far has been how the
number and types of comorbidities influence outcomes. An epidemiologic
clarification was provided through a nationwide Chinese retrospective
cohort study [33] involving 1590 PCR-confirmed (see Antigen testing
below) COVID-19 cases (mean age, 49 years; 43% female) diagnosed between
December 11, 2019, and January 31, 2020. The most common symptoms were
fever, dry cough, and fatigue (88%, 70%, and 43%, respectively). In
addition, there are reports of neurological symptoms, such as cognitive
changes, or “brain fog” (suspected brain invasion of macrophages
suppressing neural transmission—see also Chapter 4, page 82), headaches,
paresthesia, and dysautonomia (a group of medical conditions caused by
problems with the autonomic nervous system—ANS).

According to the 2019 American Thoracic Society/Infectious Disease
Society of America guideline for community-acquired pneumonia criteria
[34], 16% of the cases were considered severe. Reported proportions with
comorbidities included 17% hypertension, 8% diabetes, 4% cardiovascular
disease, 2% cerebrovascular disease, 2% chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, 1% chronic kidney disease, and 1% malignancy. At least one
comorbidity was significantly more common in severe than in nonsevere
cases (33% vs. 10%). Obesity puts those with COVID-19 at particularly
high risk of death, more so than related risk factors such as diabetes
or hypertension, according to a study of patient records by researchers
from Kaiser Permanente [35]. In people with rare autoimmune diseases
(RAIDs, some listed in Table 5.1, page 98), the risk of early death has
risen with COVID-19. The most common RAIDs were giant-cell arteritis
(22%), systemic lupus erythematosus (22%), juvenile inflammatory
arthritis (13%), unspecified arteritis (12%), and polymyositis (10%).

5.2. Diagnostic testing [36]

The clarion call during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic was
“Testing, Testing, Testing.” Tracking (“contact tracing”) an invisible
virus is one of the most valuable ways to control it, and the most
effective strategy to accomplish that goal starts with building a
comprehensive system to test anyone who may be infected. Upon
accomplishing that, those positive cases can be isolated and “contact
traced” (identifying persons who may have come into contact with the
infected person) and testing them as well and isolate all positive
cases.

Other indirect biomarkers are being identified as diagnostic indicators
for the degree and severity of a SARS-CoV-2 infection. In Chapter 1
(page 14), a malfunction of interferon (IFN-1) was identified as
attributing to an increase of at least 3.5% of patients with
life-threatening COVID-19 disease. Other studies of elevated
concentrations of inflammatory cytokines and blood markers including C
reactive protein, lactate dehydrogenase, and other digestive enzymes
demonstrate the gut microbiome being linked with the severity of
COVID-19. The gut microbiota dysbiosis after disease resolution can also
contribute to persistent symptoms (“long COVID”), highlighting the
diagnostic importance of gut microorganisms in inflammation and COVID-19
[37]

The definitive “diagnostic” process in diagnosing COVID-19 is conducted
through two types of tests (below), one testing for the antigen (people
who are currently infected) and second testing for antibodies to the
antigen (people previously infected who have developed antibodies to the
virus). Regrettably, contact tracing has not proven valuable (I can
attest to this personally having been a volunteer tracer) due to
subjects reluctance to share necessary contact information.

5.2.1. Antigen testing

An antigen test reveals if a person is actively infected with the
SARS-CoV-2 virus. The test detects certain proteins that are part of the
virus. Using a nasal or throat swab to get a fluid sample, antigen tests
can produce results in minutes. Because these tests are faster and less
expensive than molecular tests (below), some experts consider antigen
tests more practical to use for large numbers of people. Once the
infection has gone, the antigen disappears. A positive antigen test
result is considered very accurate, but there's an increased chance of
false-negative results due to testing procedures, meaning it's possible
to be infected with the virus but have negative antigen test results.
Therefore, antigen tests aren't as sensitive as molecular tests (below).
But antigen tests are readily available in that they already exist for
strep throat, influenza, tuberculosis, HIV, and other infectious
diseases.

Viral (antigen) tests identify the virus in samples from your
respiratory system, such as a swab from the inside of your nose. It is
possible to isolate the coronavirus from respiratory secretions, blood,
urine, and fecal samples for diagnostic testing. Clinically, infections
can be diagnosed with respiratory viral panels that are widely
commercially available.

5.2.2. Molecular genetic test (PCR test)

This test detects genetic material of the virus using a lab technique
called PCR. Also called a PCR test, a healthcare worker collects fluid
from a nasal or throat swab or from saliva. Results may be available in
minutes if analyzed onsite or 1–2 days if sent to an outside lab.
Molecular tests are considered very accurate (kind of the gold standard)
when properly performed by a healthcare professional, but the newer
rapid tests appear to miss some cases. The FDA also approved certain
COVID-19 at-home test kits, available only with doctor approval. It can
be done with a nasal swab kit or a saliva kit. The sample is mailed to a
lab for testing. The FDA warns consumers against buying unapproved home
tests, because they may be inaccurate and unsafe.

5.2.3. Antibody testing

Antibody tests check a person's blood by looking for antibodies, that
may (or may not) tell if the person had a past infection with the
coronavirus. Antibodies are proteins that help fight off the infections
and thus can provide immunity and protection against getting the
infection again (see Chapter 2). Neutralizing antibodies are specific to
an antigen (the virus) and thus provide protection only against the
specific disease associated with the antigen (in the case of coronavirus
as the antigen, the disease being COVID-19). If the person is exposed to
the antigen (coronavirus) again, the antibodies produce “memory” toward
the disease (remember the B_(M) cells and anamnestic protection from
back in Chapter 1?). However, there are increasing reports of
reinfection with the novel coronavirus suggesting that some coronavirus
antibodies may not be neutralizing.

Except in instances in which viral testing is delayed, antibody tests
should not be used to diagnose a current COVID-19 infection. An antibody
test may not show if you have a current COVID-19 infection because it
can take 1–3 weeks after infection for your body to make antibodies. To
see if you are currently infected, you need a viral (antigen) test.

5.2.4. Genome sequencing [38]

Genome sequencing is essentially determining the order of chemical
“bases” of a DNA molecule (see Chapter 3, page 55). Sequencing efforts
in the early stages of COVID-19 helped determine the structure of the
virus, as well as its early mutations that increased transmissibility
and produced a massive pandemic. Sequencing in late 2020 and the
beginning of 2021 began identifying the more virulent and transmissible
variants in the UK, South Africa, and finally the highly virulent delta
variant in the U.S.

In the United States, sequencing was conducted in only 0.3% of tested
samples ranking it 43rd (embarrassing) in the global genome sequencing
database project. Genome sequencing is essential in identifying, dealing
with and tracking the spread of the newly emerging and increasingly
virulent and transmissible SARS-CoV-2 variants. Such transmissibility
suggests that these variants are already widespread. The CDC announced
doubling of the U.S. sequencing effort that is expected to find more
variants in that the virus can mutate every time it transmits to a new
host. With enough mutations, a strain may be able to evade current
vaccines. If a vaccine-resistant strain is identified in the future,
vaccine research will have to be directed through evidence-based data.
That evidence will only come from genome sequencing. (You can tell that
this prescient paragraph was written prior to the delta variant surge
in 2021.)

5.3. Treatment and management strategies [39]

Care for coronavirus patients is supportive in nature and may include
rest, supplemental oxygen, fluid administration, and, for critically ill
patients, being managed in intensive care units and receiving rescue
therapies such as extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (pulmonary
ventilation). Stringent infection control is critical to preventing
transmission to caretakers, healthcare workers, and other patients.
Droplet precautions (e.g., personal protective equipment (PPE) including
surgical or procedure masks, gown, gloves, and face shields) are
indicated during the treatment of all coronavirus patients, and such
protocols for droplet-spread respiratory viruses that are part of
hospital infection control practices. Additional respiratory precautions
may also be appropriate during aerosol-generating procedures.

At the time of the writing of this Chapter on COVID-19, treatment and
management strategies continue to grow, some proving effective and some
ineffective. In that this is being written at the height of the pandemic
(early 2021), it must be considered a prospective view of appropriate
treatment and management as recommended by the medical experts guiding
us through this difficult period. It will be of interest to the readers
and future planners in the months and years ahead, to evaluate
retrospectively which of these treatment and management approaches
proved to be of most value. Hopefully, it will be an insightful lesson
to future generations in their preparedness and response to epidemics
and pandemics they may face. Future readers of this book will be able to
retrospectively assess the strengths and weaknesses of each.

5.3.1. General measures

5.3.1.1. Basic preventive steps

-   (1) Shelter-in-place or “self-isolation” (remain in your home with
    only absolutely necessary outdoor activities);
-   (2) Social distancing (separation of >6 to 10 feet between people);
-   (3) Avoid gatherings of more than 5 to 10 people;
-   (4) Wash your hands copiously and frequently;
-   (5) Face masks (at first CDC and surgeon general suggest for use
    only if infected, now it's strongly recommended for fulltime use—N90
    masks preferable);
-   
-   (6) If symptoms occur (fever, cough, chills, aches, and pains), get
    tested and if positive, selfquarantine for minimum 14 days and
    retest ×2 before assuming normal activities;
-   (7) If symptoms advance over 2–3 days, seek medical attention.

5.3.1.2. Mitigation

This process includes procedures and policies to reduce risks of
infectious spread. Results of mitigation are measured by “flattening the
(modeling) curve.” This is an inverted bell shape curve with the x-axis
representing time and the y-axis representing number of cases [40]. Not
pretty during surges!

5.3.1.3. Contact tracing

Epidemiologists, or “disease detectives,” start with the index patient,
sometimes called “patient zero.” Depending on what they already know
about that patient's condition—how the disease is spread, its natural
history, what symptoms it causes—interview the patient to learn about
their movements and identify all close contacts (persons, places, and
things). Based on the answers, public health workers contact each
associated person to explain their risk, offer screening for the
infection and conduct regular monitoring for symptoms of the infection.
As mentioned above, this important public health measure is not
progressing well due to limited “tracer personnel” and public resistance
to sharing information.

5.3.1.4. Modeling

-   (1) Study the mechanisms by which disease is spreading (i.e.,
    investigative epidemiologic and public health analysis);

-   (2) Monitor (graphically) through testing positive case volumes,
    death rates, and other vital statistics;

-   1.  • Mortality;
    2.  • New cases (total and per 100,000 pop.);
    3.  • Hospital admissions;
    4.  • Intensive care admittance;
    5.  • extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (pulmonary ventilation)

-   (3) Predict the future course of an outbreak; and

-   (4) Evaluate strategies to control a pandemic. These strategies are
    developed through the modeling data described above.

5.3.2. Immunotherapeutics

It appears that SARS-CoV-2 infection has two phases. The early phase
includes the infectious stage (approxiamtely 3 to 9 days) where the
virus is replicating followed by the later stage (7 to 21 days) where
the disease is driven by an exaggerated immune/inflammatory response to
the virus. This is the phase that leads to tissue damage, organ failures
and oftentimes, the post-COVID syndrome or long haulers syndrome. Based
on this understanding, and as has been shown in clinical outcomes,
antiviral therapies would have the greatest effect early in the course
of time and unlikely to be more beneficial in the later stages of the
disease.

(You might want to re-read the therapeutics and immunotherapies
discussed in Chapters 5 and 6. Other than vaccines [which in essence are
themselves immunotherapeutics], these immunomodulating drugs,
particularly the monoclonal antibodies [see Chapter 5, Table 5.7] are
proving to be [in conjunction with proper public health measures] a
significant hope for the future.)

5.3.2.1. Monoclonal antibodies

From the previous chapters, I'm sure by now, you appreciate the
significant benefits monoclonal antibodies (any drug with the name
suffix, “… mab”) are providing to humanity (thanks to “our immune
friend” and heroes like Dr. Fauci, Dr. Francis Collins [NIH Director]
and others), so too are its benefits being recognized in COVID-19
therapy. As previously described, these are laboratory engineered
antibodies used to mimic the immune system's own antibodies for a
specific antigen (see Chapters 2 and 4).

In the early stages, usually when the patient is at home, monoclonal
antibodies have proven effective in limiting the infectious stage. The
most effective monoclonals (as of September 2021) have been Bamlanivimab
and the combination of casirivimab plus imdevimab [41]. Based on
clinical trials and their performance on early infections, the FDA
issued EUAs in November 2020 [42] for use in treatment of outpatients
with mild to moderate COVID-19 who are high risk for progressing to
severe disease and/or hospitalization. Other monoclonal antibodies
including interleukin-6 receptor antagonists (suppressing ILK-6),
tocilizumab and sarilumab have also been shown to improve outcomes and
survival rates, especially when used in combinations.

Regeneron, the combination of casirivimab and imdevimab (together called
REGN-COV2), is directed against the spike protein of SARS-CoV-23 for use
in patients with early infection. (As effective as they are, monoclonal
antibodies should not be mistaken or substituted for vaccine properties
which are preventative. Monoclonal antibodies are therapeutics and used
asap upon infection.) An August 2021 clinical trial showed 70%
improvement in outpatients who had presented within 7 days after the
onset of symptoms and within 72h after a positive result on quantitative
RT-PCR testing of nasopharyngeal swab samples. Key end points were
achieved including a reduction from baseline viral load from day 1
through day 7 and reduction in percentage of patients who had at least
one Covid-19–related medically attended visit through day 29. One state
in the U.S. (Florida) recommends this monoclonal treatment (free) in
favor of vaccination (at 95% effective). First off, it is being used
broadly in place of vaccination which, as described above, is
inappropriate use. Second, the cost of one Regeneron treatment (infusion
plus facility costs) ranges anywhere from $1250 to $6500 versus $20 for
one vaccination [43]. It's hard to believe that such a vaccine strategy
alternative is not in the best interest of the public health.
Unfortunately, sometimes politicians preempt science.

San Francisco-based Vir Biotechnology has identified several human
neutralizing monoclonal antibody (mab) candidates against SARS-CoV-2.
The antibody's ability to neutralize the SARS-CoV-2 live virus has been
confirmed in two different laboratories. It binds to an epitope, the
specific site on the viral antigen molecule that is also seen on the
SARS-CoV-1 virus that causes SARS. This means the antigen is highly
conserved and less likely to disappear should the viruses mutate or
develop resistance to the antibody [44].

These results complement the findings of a trial that evaluated three
doses (700mg, 2800mg, and 7000mg) of a single monoclonal antibody,
bamlanivimab (LY-CoV555). Reductions in nasopharyngeal RNA levels of
SARS-CoV-2 were detected after 3 days of treatment in all groups with a
greater decline in the combined-dose bamlanivimab group than in the
placebo group. The results suggest that monoclonal antibodies, when
administered early in the infectious period serve as an effective
antiviral agent to reduce the viral load in the nasopharynx. The effects
of monoclonal antibodies and other drugs on viral load may prove to be
an important criterion for the development of agents to treat early
Covid-19 [45].

5.3.2.2. Convalescent plasma (serum)

Plasma can be collected from the blood of patients who have recovered
from COVID-19. The red and white blood cells are separated and put back
into the donor's bloodstream while the blood plasma, rich with
virus-fighting antibodies is kept aside. In one such experiment, 403
monoclonal antibodies were isolated from three convalescent COVID-19
patients. They showed that the patients had strong immune responses
against the infecting viral protein, a complex that binds to receptors
on the host cell. From this information, a subset of antibodies from the
serum was able to neutralize the virus. Nonetheless, late 2020 results
of convalescent plasma have proven equivocal [46].

5.3.2.3. Dexamethasone (and corticosteroids)

As discussed above and in detail in Chapter 4, chronic inflammatory
organ diseases (e.g., heart, lungs, kidneys) may occur in severe
Covid-19, with a subgroup of patients having markedly elevated levels of
inflammatory biomarkers. Several therapeutic interventions have been
proposed to mitigate inflammatory organ injury in viral pneumonia
including glucocorticoids (i.e., dexamethasone). Glucocorticoids have
been widely used in syndromes closely related to Covid-19, including
SARS, MERS, severe influenza, and community-acquired pneumonia. However,
the evidence to support or discourage the use of glucocorticoids under
these conditions is inconclusive. In patients hospitalized with
Covid-19, the use of dexamethasone resulted in lower 28-day mortality
among those who were receiving either invasive mechanical ventilation or
oxygen alone at randomization but not among those receiving no
respiratory support. Other steroids are also beginning to show some
promising results during early stages of the disease.

A readily available, inexpensive corticosteroid, dexamethasone, has been
found to improve survival in hospitalized patients who require
supplemental oxygen, and its greatest effect observed in patients who
require mechanical ventilation. Therefore, the use of dexamethasone is
strongly recommended for seriously ill patients in the hospital setting
but not advised for patients not on ventilation [47].

5.3.2.4. Antiviral drugs [48]

A universal vaccine effective against all viruses including SARS-CoV-2
is the holy grail of immunology and vaccinology. But short of that,
current vaccines are not sufficient or even predictable in treating
viruses, especially their mutations and variant infections of RNA
viruses (like coronaviruses). Different from recombinant and mRNA
vaccines that manipulate the body’s immune response to the virus and its
genetics, antiviral drugs attempt to boost the immune defense to inhibit
viral development. They block receptors so viruses cannot bind to and
enter healthy cells and they lower the amount of active virus in the
body. Antivirals may be broad spectrum and treat a variety of viruses
while others target a specific viral protein to disable the virus and
remain nontoxic to the host cells. Thus, most antivirals are considered
relatively harmless to the host, and thus can be used aggressively
(large dosages) to treat infections (e.g., acyclovir) [51].

Among the growing list of antiviral drugs for COVID-19, Molnupiravir by
Merck/Ridgeback Biotherapeutics and Paxlovid by Pfizer (see below) have
proven effective in certain forms and variants of the SARS-CoV-2 virus
and have been given FDA emergency use authorization approved. Other
drugs, FDA approved for uses other than antiviral therapy, are being
promoted as having antiviral qualities based on anecdotal evidence.
Scientific-based studies have proven these drugs to be questionable or
wholy ineffective in the treatment of coronaviruses and have even shown
adverse effects in their use for such therapy (see below). These drugs
include (but are not limited to) hydroxychloroquine (combined with the
antibiotic Azithromycin) and Ivermectin (an antiparasitic drug use
mostly in veterinary medicine).

5.3.2.4.1. Paxlovid (Pfizer)

Paxlovid (nirmatrelvir/ritonavir) is a protease inhibitor, similar to
those used against HIV. SARS-CoV-2 uses its cellular enzymes (protease)
to replicate its RNA-containing “polyproteins” (see Life Cycle, page
189). By blocking the enzyme’s activity, the drug prevents the
production of new, functional viral particles. Paxlovid is quickly
broken down in the body, so it needs a booster in the form of a second
drug called ritonavir (also a protease inhibitor) to keep it active for
a longer period in the host. Notwithstanding potential drug–drug
interactions, these drugs have shown significant promise with a 90%
reduction in hospitalization rates [49].

5.3.2.4.2. Molnupiravir (Merck/Ridgeback Biotherapeutics)

Molnupiravir is known as a nucleoside analogue. It mimics one of the RNA
proteins that make up SARS-CoV-2. Once inside cells, the virus uses a
polymerase enzyme to attach to its RNA and assemble them into new copies
of viral RNA. The virus needs a template for construction of new viral
RNA and molnupiravir interrupts this template and causes the virus to
continuously mutate until it virtually destroys itself with defective
genetic material. Due to some side effects from the drug, it is used
only in high-risk patients with advanced disease [50].

5.3.2.4.3. Remdesivir

This antiviral drug is thought to interfere with the mechanism that
coronavirus uses to make copies of itself (see Fig. 7.1 and discussion
on Life Cycle above). Scientists are still working out exactly how that
occurs. A preliminary report published in The New England Journal of
Medicine showed that the drug shortened recovery time for people with
COVID-19 from an average of 15 days to about 11 days. The drug also
seems to show increased benefits when used in combination therapies
(e.g., with Baricitinib and monoclonal antibodies).

In the advanced stages of COVID-19, Remdesivir is the only FDA approved
drug. It is recommended for use in hospitalized patients who require
supplemental oxygen. However, it is not routinely recommended for
patients who require mechanical ventilation because of a lack of data
showing any benefit at this advanced stage of the disease. The addition
of Baricitinib with remdesivir (i.e., a combination) proved to be
superior to Remdesivir alone in reducing recovery time and accelerating
improvement in clinical status among hospitalized Covid-19 patients
[51].

5.3.2.4.4. Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil) combined with azithromycin (Zithromax)

A small sample survey showed that hydroxychloroquine treatment (a
biologic used for malaria and lupus) is associated with viral load
reduction in COVID-19 patients and its effect is reinforced by
azithromycin (an antibiotic). A study reported in the New England
Journal of Medicine concludes that results do not support the use of
hydroxychloroquine at present, outside randomized clinical trials
testing its efficacy. Further work is warranted to determine if these
compounds could be useful as chemoprophylaxis to prevent the
transmission of the virus without significant adverse effects.
Continuing studies are proving increasingly negative and demonstrating
more potential adverse effects than benefits. These clinical findings
were never considered when hydroxychloroquine was enthusiastically
promoted by a U.S. political figure (a president to be exact) with no
medical knowledge [52].

5.3.2.4.5. Ivermectin

This drug is approved by the FDA to treat people with intestinal
strongyloidiasis and onchocerciasis, two conditions caused by parasitic
worms. In addition, some topical forms of ivermectin are approved to
treat external parasites like head lice and for skin conditions such as
rosacea. Some forms of animal ivermectin are approved to prevent
heartworm disease and treat certain internal and external parasites. It
is important to note that these products are different from the ones for
people, and safe only when used in animals as prescribed. Currently
available data do not show ivermectin is effective against COVID-19
[53].

5.3.2.4.6. Other developing antiviral drugs for COVID-19

Besides continuing development of new vaccines to address SARS-CoV2
resistant variants, new antiviral drugs will continue to be developed as
adjunctive therapies to vaccines and any other evolving
immunotherapeutic measures to COVID-19. No doubt by the time you are
reading this, beyond all of the drugs and treatment modalities listed
below and mentioned in this section, there will be an array of new
therapeutic measures being implemented for patient treatments and
hopefully, for prevention [54].

1.  • Interferons: antiviral cytokines under investigation;
2.  • Lopinavir/Ritonavir and other HIV protease inhibitors
3.  • Nitazoxanide: antiparasitic drug under investigation
4.  • Lopinavir/Ritonavir and other HIV protease inhibitors
5.  • Fluvoxamine: an antidepressant pill as an antiinflammatory
6.  • Budesonide: an inhaled steroid used to prevent asthma symptoms

5.3.3. Vaccines [55]

By definition, a vaccine is a biological preparation that provides
active, innate, and adaptive immunity to a particular infectious disease
(e.g., measles, flu, SARS-CoV-2) by stimulating antibodies or
manipulating messenger RNA (mRNA) to attack the source of the infection.
The traditional approach has been to develop an agent that resembles the
disease-causing microorganism made from weakened or killed (called an
attenuated form or viral vector) fragments of the offending microbe, its
toxins, or one of its surface proteins. This process induces a
subclinical antigen stimulus that is recognized by the immune system
that produces corresponding immune cells and antibodies, but without
inducing clinical disease. In the novel coronavirus, the spike protein
was targeted for most of the vaccine human clinical trials. Research
centered on how the immune system, particularly B and T cells, responded
to the spike protein and revealed the classic B cell response of
producing the antibodies that recognize SARS-CoV-2, while T cells play
their classic role in supporting the development of the B-cell response.

[ Figure 7.2  mRNA (messenger RNA) vaccine.An mRNA molecule imbibed with
an engineered strip of genetic material to mimic the RNA of the virus.
It is injected into the patient and generates copies of the spike
protein which produce APCs that produce an antibody immune response that
destroys the virus. Washington Post. 2020. ]

Vaccine research teams also work on the development of vaccines using
the virus itself, in a weakened or inactivated form while some use
viral-vectors wherein a virus such as measles or adenovirus (recombinant
serotype Ad5) is genetically engineered so that it can produce or
“mimic” corresponding proteins to the target microbe. The teams that
showed the greatest success (as of early 2021) against the RNA novel
coronavirus used genetic instructions in the form of messenger RNA
(mRNA) to prompt a subclinical immune response from the virus.

5.3.3.1. mRNA vaccines [56]

The science of the mRNA vaccine is an elegant model of immunology and
genetics technology (Fig. 7.2). An RNA virus (e.g., novel coronavirus)
means its genetic material is encoded in RNA rather than DNA. Once the
virus is inside our cells, it releases its RNA and makes long viral
proteins to compromise the immune system (see page 190 and Fig. 7.1).
Inside the cells, the cell ribosomes read the mRNA instructions for the
spike protein and the cell begins to generate copies of it. Genomic
transcription and translation (see Chapter 3, Genetics and Genomics,
page 45) produce copies of the virus’ surface receptors (spike proteins,
in the case of novel coronavirus). Then, as the patient’s immune system
recognizes a “foreign invader,” it initiates an APC/ T_(H) and T_(C)
response (remember those from Chapter 1?) that release T_(H) cells that
generate cytotoxic T_(C) and B cells (if you’d like, go back to Chapter
1, Fig. 1.3 and 1.4 to review this innate immune process). The T_(C)
cells go to work doing their job of phagocytizing the virus while the B
cells generate antibodies that bind and block the virus from infecting
healthy cells [57]. Goodbye virus…at least for 6 to 12 months they are
projecting at which time we will probably be looking at COVID-19 booster
shots.

One of the weapons in our cells is an RNA surveillance mechanism called
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) that protects us from many genetic
mutations that could cause disease. The genome of COVID-19 is a
positive-sense, single-stranded RNA that can evade NMD and prevent it
from degrading RNA by producing proteins that interacts with certain
proteins that modify the chemical structure of RNA. With the progression
of new viral strains, the mRNA vaccines can be easily genetically
reprogrammed to recognize mutant viral strains (called variants) and
allow for the rapid development (within weeks) of second-generation
vaccines that directly target processes critical to a virus’s life cycle
[57].

The first vaccines approved by the FDA in early 2021 were the mRNA
(messenger RNA) technology that had been in development for a number of
years but not yet used or approved. Two pharmaceutical manufacturers,
Pfizer and Moderna, were the first to produce a viable product for
delivery, distribution, and storage. All three of those aspects of
successful production proved as challenging as the science itself.
Storage was the major issue in that Pfizer’s product needed storage at
-94°F and Moderna -50°F. Since initial distribution, those temperatures
were moderated (decreased) after extended testing. But the logistics of
distribution and delivering sufficient drug and associated requirements
(syringes, needles, and trained vaccinators) in most countries proved
problematic, especially given the need for two shots given 3 weeks
apart.

Subsequent vaccines (mRNA and viral vector technologies) requiring
normal storage temperatures and only one shot have been subsequently (as
of this writing date) approved and introduced. Success in this type of
mRNA vaccine proved 95% effective in December 2020 and led to worldwide
use of Pfizer’s BNT162b2 and Moderna’s ChAdOx1 mRNA vaccines since 2021.
This form of mRNA vaccine has also proven effective against variants of
the novel coronavirus [59].

AI and immunoinformatics (see below) play a central role in vaccines by
suggesting components understanding viral protein structures, and
helping medical researchers hunt through tens of thousands of relevant
research papers at an unprecedented pace. AI supported preclinical
studies in mice of a candidate vaccine based on this spike protein are
already underway at NIH's Vaccine Research Center (VRC) [58]. But there
will be many more steps after that to test safety and efficacy, and then
to scale up to produce millions of doses. National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases is working with numerous biotechnology companies
(AstraZeneca, Pfizer, J&J, Moderna, et al.) to use the latest findings
developed in vaccine research using messenger RNA (mRNA), molecules that
serve as templates for making proteins. The goal is to direct the body
to produce a spike protein in such a way to elicit an immune response
and the production of antibodies. Other forms of vaccine candidates are
also in preclinical development.

5.3.3.2. CRISPR-Cas13 and RNA screening [60]

A new Cas13 RNA screen (vs. Cas 9 from Chapter 6, page 168) has been
developed to establish guide RNAs for the COVID-19 coronavirus and human
RNA segments that could be used in vaccines, therapeutics, and
diagnostics. Similar to CRISPR-Cas9 (see Chapter 6, page 168), a novel
Cas13-based editing tool enables researchers to target mRNA (vs. DNA for
the Cas9 enzyme) and knockout genes without altering the genome. Using
the CRISPR-Cas13 enzyme, researchers have created a genetic screen for
RNA, currently designed for use on humans, that they say could also be
used on RNA containing viruses and bacteria.

The developers have used their parallel-screening technique to create
optimal guide RNAs for the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus that could be used for
future detection and therapeutic applications. The platform is optimized
to run massively parallel genetic screens at the RNA level in human
cells because it is based on the CRISPR-Cas13 enzyme that targets RNA
instead of DNA. The data are collected by targeting thousands of
different sites in human RNA transcripts to create a predictive model to
expedite identification of the most effective Cas13 guide RNAs.

5.3.4. Vaccination (immunization)

Vaccination is the act of getting a vaccine, usually in the form of an
injection into the arm of a person (immunization) to protect against a
disease. Testing for an effective vaccine begins with giving the vaccine
to animals such as mice or monkeys to see if it produces an immune
response. Then Phase 1 vaccinates a small number of people to test
safety and dosage as well as to confirm that it stimulates the immune
system. Phase 2 includes hundreds of people split into groups (viral
injected and placebo, called a double-blind study where members of the
two groups are kept unknown, “blind” to the researchers), such as
children and the elderly, to see if the vaccine acts differently in them
as well as safety and ability to stimulate the immune system. Phase 3
injects the vaccine into thousands of people (again, two groups) to see
how many become infected, compared with volunteers who received a
placebo. These trials can determine any rare side effects that might be
missed in earlier studies.

Finally, if the vaccine protects against the coronavirus in at least 50%
of vaccinated people it is considered effective and regulators decide
whether to approve the vaccine or not. During a pandemic (or any such
studies), a vaccine trial may be terminated if the test group is
demonstrating too negative a result. Conversely, if the test results are
proving highly effective (much better result in the test group that the
placebo group), the FDA may issue an EUA (emergency utilization
authorization) even before getting formal approval. The mRNA vaccines
(Pfizer and Moderna) proved highly effective at 95% and 94%,
respectively, and received immediate EUA in January 2021 [61].

At least seven teams are developing vaccines using the virus itself (J&J
just got EUA for a viral vector vaccine with 75% effectivity and
AstraZeneca received UK approval), in a weakened or inactivated form.
Around 25 groups say they are working on viral-vector vaccines. A virus
such as measles or adenovirus (recombinant serotype Ad5) is genetically
engineered so that it can produce coronavirus proteins in the body. At
least 20 teams are aiming to use genetic instructions (in the form of
DNA or RNA) for a coronavirus protein that prompts an immune response.
Many researchers are now experimenting with injecting coronavirus
proteins directly into the body to mimic the coronavirus's outer coat.
When you read this Chapter, it's most likely you will know.

5.3.4.1. R naught (R^(O) or R0) and herd immunity

The concept of herd immunity is an epidemiological formula in which a
sufficient amount of people are immunized or vaccinated against a
pathogen, thus reducing the rate of infection throughout the population.
The vaccination levels must produce a threshold called the “R-Naught” or
R_(O) (The SIR [“susceptible-infectious-recovered”]) formulation, a
factor that determines the transmissibility of the pathogen. It denotes
the average number of secondary cases of an infectious disease that 1
case would generate in a completely susceptible population. That is,
when one infected person infects greater than one other person, a
potential exponential increase in infections results leading to an
epidemic or pandemic. If, however, transmission on average remains below
an R_(O) of one person, this will result in a decreasing spread in
infection and eventually into a majority of the population (an estimated
70%–80% needed) to produce “herd immunity.”

In the absence of a vaccine, developing herd immunity to an infectious
agent requires large amounts of people actually being infected,
developing antibodies to the infectious agent and thus becoming
immunized against future infection. Scientists are not always certain if
this immunity is permanent or for how long it might last. But even
assuming that immunity is long-lasting, a very large number of people
must be infected to reach the 70%–80% herd immunity threshold required.
During this process, mortality of certain infections like SARS-CoV-2
could reach unacceptable levels as occurred in Sweden where herd
immunity was aspired to prematurely [62].

Nor does a pathogen magically disappear when the herd immunity threshold
is reached. Rather, it only means that transmission begins to slow down
and that a new epidemic is unlikely to start up again. An uncontrolled
pandemic could continue for months after herd immunity is reached,
potentially infecting many more millions in the process. These
additional infections are what epidemiologists refer to as “overshoot.”
[63].

5.3.4.2. Human vaccines project

Researchers are comprehensively genetically sequencing the human immune
(the "immunome") system, a system billions of times larger than the
human genome. The goal is to encode the genes (the antibody-encoding
genes—see Chapter 1, page 16) responsible for circulating B cell
receptors. This can provide potentially new antibody targets for
vaccines and therapeutics that work across populations. The Human
Vaccines Project seeks to define the genetic predisposition of people's
ability to respond and adapt to an immense range of diseases [64].

The SARS-CoV-2 COVID-19 pandemic will certainly expedite further
progress on this critical area of clinical research. The study
specifically looks at one part of the adaptive immune system, the
circulating B-cell receptors that are responsible for the production of
antibodies, considered the primary determinant of immunity in people.
The receptors form unique sequences of nucleotides (DNA base compounds)
known as receptor “clonotypes.” [65] This creates a small number of
genes that can lead to an incredible diversity of receptors, allowing
the immune system to recognize almost any new pathogen (a little
complicated, but give it a reread and you'll see what a great potential
it has).

This Project marks a crucial step toward understanding how the human
immune system works, setting the stage for developing next-generation
health products, drugs, and vaccines through the convergence of genomics
and immune monitoring technologies with machine learning and artificial
intelligence (AI) [66].

5.3.4.3. A vaccine epitaph [67]

Finally, a sad chapter in the U.S. history of vaccinations lingers in
the minds and hearts of people of color. It has generated a mistrust of
the medical system among some Black Americans regarding vaccination and
it produced a stark disparity in morbidity and mortality for those who
got COVID-19 vaccinations early in the U.S. As of February 2021, more
than 60% of Caucasian American were vaccinated versus roughly 6% of
African Americans. This mistrust is rooted in the infamous study of a
vaccine for syphilis that left Black men in Tuskegee, Ala., to suffer
from the disease. In 1932, the U.S. Public Health Service recruited
hundreds of Black men as human subjects for the study (399 men with
syphilis and 201 without).

The researchers offered free meals and checkups, but never explained
that participants would be human subjects in a study designed to
withhold medical treatment. “I think a part of the challenge is that
there's still considerable anxiety about the vaccine,” says Amir
Farooqi, director of the Central Alabama VA. Dr. Reuben Warren, director
of Tuskegee University's bioethics center, notes the mistrust of the
healthcare system among African Americans is “both historical and
current.”

6. Immunoinformatics (computational immunology) [68]

The explosion of new immunological data through increased research in
understanding the immune system, particularly in infectious disease
pathogenesis and the application of the knowledge from bioinformatics,
has led to a better understanding of the importance of the immune system
through immunoinformatics (computational immunology). Through increased
knowledge of the immune system, AI research, and the cost-effective,
specific, and effective approaches like in silico immunoinformatics
(scientific experimentation and research conducted or produced by means
of computer modeling or computer simulation), the concerns for emerging
and potentially resurging diseases caused by pathogenic organisms,
antigenic variability/complex lifecycle of pathogens (see Fig. 7.1, life
cycle, above) and the need of personalized vaccination can be combated
on a molecular level. (Wow! That may have been the longest sentence in
this entire manuscript. Maybe the copyeditors will rework it, cause I
sure ain't going to try.)

AI and immunoinformatics are being used to better understand the
structure of proteins involved in SARS-Cov-2 infection in search for
potential treatments and vaccines (perfect example, the mRNA vaccine).
Proteins have a three-dimensional structure, that is determined by their
genetically encoded amino acid sequence (Next-gen sequencing [NGS] of
genetic code), and this structure influences the role and function of
the protein. An AI Google DeepMind system called AlphaFold [69] uses
amino acid sequencing and protein structure to make predictions to
construct a “potential of mean force” that can be used to characterize
the protein's shape. This system has been applied to predict the
structures of six proteins related to SARS-CoV-2.

In silico immunoinformatics depends on experimental science (“wet lab”)
to produce raw data for analysis. Thus, its predictions are not formal
proofs of any concepts. They do not replace the traditional experimental
research methods of actually testing hypotheses. The quality of
immunoinformatics predictions depends on the quality of data and the
sophistication of the algorithms being used (remember the good old,
"garbage in – garbage out" axiom?). Sequence data from high-throughput
analysis often contain errors. If the sequences are wrong, or
annotations incorrectly, the results from the downstream analysis could
be misleading as well (ergo, “garbage in—garbage out”). The future of
immunological research will be enhanced by the ability to make
discoveries in biologics (e.g., vaccines) more effectively and
efficiently through combined AI and in silico immunoinformatics with
traditional experimental research methods. Notwithstanding the credit
certain narcissistic politicians like to take for the rapid development
of COVID-19 vaccines, it was the combination of brilliant researchers,
AI, and immunoinformatics that brought home the bacon in a desperate
COVID-19 human crisis.

7. Epidemiology and public health considerations in COVID-19

7.1. Current epidemiologic considerations

The world celebrated the newly discovered vaccines in early 2021 that
began the mitigation and reversal of the COVID-19 pandemic. The
suffering and ill-effects of the novel coronavirus have been devastating
to the world through its toll on lives and its ever-increasing death
toll, not to mention the crippling economic effects it has had on
individuals and governments.

Without a doubt the first hooray must go to the teams of research
scientists at companies like Pfizer, Moderna, AstraZeneca, J&J, and
others in varying stages of vaccine research. The second cheer should go
to the governments of most industrialized countries who prioritized
vaccine development with little concerns for costs of such initiatives.
Certainly, included in that cheer must be the U.S.'s Operation Warp
Speed that committed its best and brightest to answer the clarion call.
Whereas, such successes in vaccine development had been experienced
historically, none was accomplished in months of the initial and growing
spread of the infectious disease. Rather, the world had to wait years,
sometimes decades, and sometimes “never.”

The very existence of a fertile and brilliant body of worldwide
researchers has been applauded for years by an appreciative public who
have benefitted from their efforts. Also, accolades must be given to the
governments who offered selfless, humanitarian support in the form of
leadership, some humble and some perhaps, ego-driven. But perhaps the
greatest cheer should go to the contribution made by the immunology,
genetic, and AI technologies that provided the research scientists and
the tools needed to accomplish the task in record time. Those
achievements by the research and scientific community started many years
ago with the early work of heroes in immunology and genetic research
mentioned throughout this book.

Answers are available to the researchers today within minutes to
seconds, thanks to new methods of rapid whole genome sequencing (WGS)
[70] and AI big data analytics. Indeed, the scientific work over the
past 10–20 years, plus their concentrated efforts over just 6 months are
truly the backbone of the success witnessed in the development of the
COVID-19 vaccines. We must all be thankful for these accomplishments
that have begun to reduce the human suffering and economic devastation
brought upon the world from this COVID-19 pandemic. But we must also
remain scrupulously vigilant.

Today, the impact of COVID-19 and its rapidly evolving variants portend
equal or more disastrous effects than the Spanish Flu of 1918–19, the
Asian Flu of 1957–58, the Hong Kong Flu of 2003, and the SARS
(SARS-CoV-1 coronavirus) of 2003. SARS-CoV-2 novel coronavirus is a far
more contagious member of the coronaviruses (CoVs), the large family of
enveloped, positive-strand RNA viruses responsible for a substantial
portion of upper respiratory tract infections. Many countries (e.g.,
China, Singapore, Hong Kong, South Korea, Italy, Spain, and the USA)
have relied on an extrapolation of classic infection-control and
public-health measures similar to those used for SARS-CoV-1 to contain
the COVID-19 pandemic. They range from extreme quarantine measures,
“shelter-in-place,” “social distancing,” to painstaking detailed contact
tracing with hundreds of contact tracers. However, these measures may
not be effective in the coming years for tackling the scale of COVID-19.

Vertically integrated digital and AI technologies are being introduced
for monitoring, surveillance, detection, prevention of COVID-19, and to
mitigate its spread and its direct and indirect impact to worldwide
healthcare systems. The initial reaction in many countries to COVID-19
is for healthcare facilities to reduce or even cease many clinical
services, including closure of clinics and postponement of medical
appointments or elective surgeries. However, such strategies cannot be
sustained indefinitely if the COVID-19 pandemic extends beyond 6 months.
Healthcare systems should plan to use digital technology “virtual
clinics” using telehealth consultations with imaging data uploaded from
peripheral sites and interpreted remotely. This would ensure that
patients continue to receive standard clinical care while reducing
physical crowding of patients into hospitals. Chatbots staffed by health
professionals can also provide early diagnoses as well as patient
education. And blockchain technologies can coordinate hospital, clinics,
and pharmacy patient information.

7.2. Public health considerations and recommendations

Undoubtedly, by the time you read this book, the public health
literature and more so, programs and research in the epidemiology,
bioscience considerations, clinical aspects, and immunological
considerations regarding COVID-19 will have proliferated into a major
body of new science and “disruptive technologies.” Indeed, the
reemergence of yet another more virulent SARS-CoV virus and global
pandemic will emphasize the ongoing and permanent challenge that
infectious diseases pose and the need for global cooperation and
preparedness, even during “interim” periods.

A well-done opinion piece written by Michael Gerson in the Washington
Post in late February 2021 entitled “Six takeaways from covid-19 that
could shape our future,” highlights the best public health advise we can
“takeaway” from the COVID-19 pandemic [76]

-   1. We are in a brutal evolutionary struggle between humans and
    microbial pathogens. The pathogens evolve much faster than we adapt.
    A new pathogen emerges, on average, every 4–5 years. Covid-19 has
    been bad, but the larger danger comes from a novel influenza that
    has a high fatality rate and is highly transmissible before the
    development of symptoms. There is a 1% yearly probability of an
    influenza pandemic that could cause six million deaths or more.
-   2. About 75% of new emerging diseases are zoonotic (originating in
    animals). Humans amplify that threat in a variety of ways. Our
    appetites are insatiable for animal protein (e.g., pigs, cows, and
    god forbid, wet-markets). Deforestation is bringing humans into more
    frequent contact with wildlife such as bats (spreading infection).
    It has been well documented now that popular house pets (dogs and
    cats) can contract and transmit the coronavirus. Scientists in the
    Predict program have discovered 1200 animal-borne diseases over the
    past several years and estimate there may be 700,000 more we don't
    know about.
-   3. The world is “a little blue marble” and spreading disease to and
    from our borders in places such as Brazil, South Africa, or Britain
    can, as we are seeing with the coronavirus, lead to genetic variants
    that evade immunity, vaccine, and become potentially deadly.
    Fighting diseases in one country is not as effective as them being
    fought “everywhere.”
-   4. The U.S. government failed to provide early and adequate support
    for testing and contact tracing with SARS-CoV-2. It failed in a
    timely manner to effectively distribute medical supplies and
    equipment, standardize epidemic data, and enforce rational triggers
    for stay-at-home orders and school closings. Such errors resulted in
    an inadequate response to the COVID-19 pandemic (and unspeakable
    death). We cannot allow such errors in adherence and commitment to
    public health guidelines to occur again.
-   5. A large number (perhaps a majority) of Americans failed to take
    relatively minor preventive steps such as mask-wearing and social
    distancing. Part of this was because of a president who consistently
    played down and politicized the public health crisis. But the
    problem runs deeper than political ineptitude and resistance to
    commonsense measures. Epidemiology and public health dictate the
    necessity of demographic assessments of age, comorbidity,
    socioeconomic factors, and basic living conditions in a pandemic or
    for that matter, any health-related issues. How would the U.S. have
    behaviored if political and societal actions had been more closely
    aligned and sensitive to these epidemiologic factors and risk of
    death? It requires conscientious, organized, astute, and empathetic
    governing to assess specific and generic risks to protect humanity.
-   6. Finally, calibrating our responses and responsibilities to the
    urgencies and dangers we face as a society, will protect the public
    health and improve the well-being of humankind in general. Attention
    to climate change, pollution, farming, deforestation, wildlife,
    health, precision health, disease prevention, and providing adequate
    federal planning, resources, and funding for the next pandemic is
    our only hope for a better future.

And I'll add one more to this list of takeaways regarding lessons
learned from the COVID-19 pandemic regarding our personal health and
wellness. A conscious effort toward physical activity and weight
management in our lifestyle will bolster host antiviral, immune defense,
and improve the vaccine immune response. I have tried to accentuate the
importance and value of weight control numerous times throughout this
book, but I failed to mention the importance of physical activity as
well. A 30- to 60-min regimen of walking, running, gym workouts, or
other physical sports can stimulate the ongoing exchange of important
types of white blood cells between the circulation and tissues.
Exercise-induced increases in antipathogenic leukocytes may also enhance
immunosurveillance, reduce illness risk, and lower systemic
inflammation. This pandemic should be a wake-up call to everyone that
good health habits, health prevention, proper diet, and exercise are
what we need to win this war.

I began this Chapter by reporting on the number of worldwide COVID-19
recorded cases and deaths to date. The number reminds me of a sad
saying. “One death is a tragedy—2.5 million is a statistic.” We cannot
let ourselves become inured to this sad calamity. Maybe if we think of
it as 2.5 million personal tragedies (and growing), we'll realize what
the world and each of us as caring individuals have endured through this
apocalyptic pandemic. Will things get better? Certainly, the development
of vaccines and a path toward herd immunity is now our hope. But will we
continue to face human tragedies, not statistics, of epic proportions in
the future? As I stated at the beginning of this chapter, it is
estimated that there are 380 trillion (10³⁸) viruses residing in
environmental ecosystems throughout the world. Let us all hope and pray
that the applications of immunology, genetic science, AI technologies,
and mostly our personal and societal efforts will meet and defeat this
public health challenge of infectious disease pandemics and will help
humanity create a better place in which we and future generations all
can live.

8. Brief research summaries on infectious diseases and COVID-19

(Reference citations for each research study presented below can be
found in the corresponding footnote. Also, a listing of available
scientific reference sources and databases used by the author are
included in the book's Acknowledgments.)

By now, you have probably recognized my strong interest in AI, as I
admitted to back in the Preface of the book. As I mentioned, I thought
that the majority of readers of this will have some interest in the AI
research directly related to the topics we've been discussing. AI
research tends to be more practical in its applications than pure
bioscience, laboratory research and thus, may be of more interest to
readers of this book. I hope you have found some, if not all of the
summaries of interest.

-   1. Forbes Magazine reported on a global AI database company,
    BlueDot, using an AI-powered algorithm, machine learning, and
    natural-language processing (NLP) to analyze information from a
    multitude of sources that can track over a 100 infectious diseases
    [72].
-   
-   2. AI is playing an important role in evaluating the pathogenesis,
    diagnosis, and treatment of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. There is an urgent
    need to develop a system with AI-based machine learning capacity to
    analyze and integrate imaging-based, patient-based, clinician-based,
    and molecular measurements-based data, to fight the outbreak of
    COVID-19 and enable more efficient responses to unknown infections
    in the future [73].
-   3. Vaxign is a reverse vaccinology tool being used with Vaxign-ML
    machine learning tool to predict COVID-19 vaccine candidates. A
    study applied the state-of-the-art Vaxign reserve vaccinology and
    Vaxign-ML machine learning strategies to the entire SARS-CoV-2
    proteomes including both structural and nonstructural proteins for
    vaccine candidate prediction. The results indicate for the first
    time that many nonstructural proteins could be used as potential
    vaccine candidates [74].
-   4. AI technologies are powerful tools against COVID-19 and widely
    used in combating this pandemic. A survey investigated the main
    scope and contributions of AI in combating COVID-19 from the aspects
    of disease detection and diagnosis, virology and pathogenesis, drug
    and vaccine development, and epidemic and transmission prediction.
    AI mainly focuses on medical image inspection, genomics, drug
    development, and transmission prediction, and thus still has great
    potential in this field [75].
-   5. On March 16, 2020, the White House issued a call to action for
    global AI researchers to develop new algorithms and data mining
    techniques to assist in COVID-19-related research. Within a short
    period of time, advanced machine learning techniques were developed
    and implemented to better understand the pattern of viral spread,
    further improve diagnostic speed and accuracy, develop novel
    effective therapeutic approaches, and potentially identify the most
    susceptible people based on personalized genetic and physiological
    characteristics. This is only the beginning of a permanent role AI
    will play in global healthcare [76].
-   6. One of the main challenges in medical microbiology is to develop
    novel experimental approaches that enable a better understanding of
    bacterial infections and antimicrobial resistance (especially in
    light of the COVID-19 pandemic). Today, the use of in silico
    experiments (research conducted by means of computer modeling or
    computer simulation) jointly with computational and machine learning
    offer an in depth understanding of systems biology, allowing us to
    use this knowledge for the prevention, prediction, and control of
    infectious disease. An in-depth knowledge of host–pathogen–protein
    interactions, combined with a better understanding of a host's
    immune response and bacterial fitness, is key determinants for
    halting infectious diseases and antimicrobial resistance
    dissemination [77].
-   7. IoTs (Internet of Things) are providing a platform that allows
    public-health agencies access to data for monitoring the COVID-19
    pandemic. For example, the “Worldometer” provides a real-time update
    on the actual number of people known to have COVID-19 worldwide,
    including daily new cases of the disease, disease distribution by
    countries and severity of disease (recovered, critical condition or
    death). Johns Hopkins University's Center for Systems Science and
    Engineering has also developed a real-time tracking map for
    following cases of COVID-19 across the world, using the data
    collected from US CDC, the World Health Organization (WHO), the
    European Center for Disease Prevention and Control, the Chinese
    Center for Disease Control and Prevention (China CDC), and the
    Chinese website DXY [78].
-   8. Big data are providing opportunities for performing modeling
    studies of viral activity and for guiding individual country
    healthcare policymakers to enhance preparation for the outbreak.
    Using three global databases, WHO International Health Regulations,
    the State Parties Self-Assessment Annual Reporting Tool, Joint
    External Evaluation reports and the Infectious Disease Vulnerability
    Index, health authorities are performing AI modeling studies of
    “nowcasting” and forecasting COVID-19 disease activity throughout
    the world for public-health planning and control worldwide [79].
-   9. When the Covid-19 pandemic enters dangerous new phases, the
    critical question becomes whether and when to take aggressive public
    health interventions to slow down the spread of COVID-19. A study
    was undertaken to develop AI inspired methods for real-time
    forecasting and evaluating intervention strategies to curb worldwide
    spread. A modified autoencoder for modeling the transmission
    dynamics of the epidemics is being developed and applied to the
    surveillance data of cumulative and new Covid-19 cases and deaths
    from WHO, as of March 16, 2020. Total peak number of cumulative
    cases and new cases in the world with later intervention could reach
    255,392,154 by January 2021. However, the total peak number of
    cumulative cases in the world with one-week earlier intervention
    were reduced to 1,530,276. We observed that delaying intervention
    for 1 month caused the maximum number of cumulative cases to
    increase 166.89 times, and the number of deaths increase from 53,560
    to 8,938,725. Disastrous consequences if immediate action to
    intervene are not taken [80].
-   10. MIT published a paper describing the needed changes in three
    areas if we want AI to be useful in future pandemics. First,
    prediction through database companies using a range of NLP
    algorithms to monitor news outlets and official health-care reports
    in different languages around the world; second, machine-learning
    models with large datasets for examining medical images to catch
    early signs of disease that human doctors miss, from eye disease to
    heart conditions to cancer; third, identifying cures through big
    data analysis of drug trials and design algorithms to highlight
    biological and molecular structures matching drugs with candidates
    [81].
-   11. Advanced deep learning-based algorithms known as the
    convolutional neural network (CNN) exert a great effect on
    extracting highly essential features, mostly in terms of medical
    images. This technique using CT and X-ray image scans has been
    adopted in most of the recently published articles on the
    coronavirus with remarkable results. Furthermore, according to this
    paper, it can be noted and said that deep learning technology has
    potential clinical applications [82].
-   12. A new framework has been proposed to detect COVID-19 using
    built-in smartphone sensors (IoTs). The proposal provides a low-cost
    solution that ordinary people can use on their smartphones for the
    virus detection purposes. The designed AI enabled framework reads
    the smartphone sensors signal measurements to predict the grade of
    severity of the pneumonia as well as predicting the result of the
    disease [83].
-   13. AI and deep learning algorithms are being developed to enhance
    the detection and diagnosis of COVID-19. The need to provide access
    to accurate and low-cost tests for the diagnosis of COVID-19 is
    critical. Such AI algorithms can be used as an initial screening
    tool for suspected cases so that patients at higher risk could have
    confirmatory laboratory-based tests and be isolated if necessary.
    These algorithms could help healthcare providers triage patients
    with COVID-19 into potentially three groups: the 80% who have mild
    disease; the 15% who have moderate disease; and the 5% who have
    severe disease, including those at high risk of mortality. Finally,
    AI can facilitate the discovery of novel drugs with which to treat
    COVID-19 [84].
-   14. Continuing efforts are being made to develop novel diagnostic
    approaches to COVID-19 using machine learning algorithms. Machine
    learning-based screening of SARS-CoV-2 assay designs using a
    CRISPR-based virus detection system (see Cas13 above) is
    demonstrating high sensitivity and speed. Neural network classifiers
    have been developed for a large-scale screening of COVID-19 patients
    based on their distinct respiratory pattern. lso, a deep-learning
    based analysis system of thoracic CT images, was constructed for
    automated detection and monitoring of COVID-19 patients over time.
    Rapid development of automated diagnostic systems based on AI and
    machine learning can not only contribute to increased diagnostic
    accuracy and speed but will also protect healthcare workers by
    decreasing their contacts with COVID-19 patients [85].

Chapter highlights (key points)

-   1. A novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2), probably zoonotically
    transferred from a bat to a monkey to a human late in 2019, has
    produced an infectious pandemic of epic proportions labeled
    COVID-19.
-   2. As an RNA virus, SARS-CoV-2 is prone towards mutations resulting
    in variants (e.g., delta, omicron—so far, as of January 2022) which
    can be more virulent and contagious than the originating novel
    coronavirus.
-   3. Messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccines have been developed (in record
    time) that seem to provide protection of greater than 95% with
    periodic booster enhancements.
-   4. An altered mRNA molecule vaccine with an engineered strip of
    genetic material to mimic the RNA of the virus is injected into the
    patient causing (actually “tricking”) the spiked protein of the
    virus to induce neutralizing antibodies that destroy the invading
    coronavirus.
-   5. Reaching greater than 70% to 80% of the population (“herd
    immunity” when a sufficient amount of people are immunized
    [“R-Naught” R0 < 1]) requires comprehensive vaccination,
    comprehensive testing, masks, and social distancing, along with
    supplemental protection (boosters) against subsequent spread.
-   6. Diagnostic testing including antibody testing (to detect active
    or past infection), PCR antigen testing (to detect active
    infection), and the gold standard, genetic sequencing to identify
    the code of the invading virus or any variants.
-   7. Besides essential vaccination (prevention), antiviral agents to
    treat infections (most effective early) have been developed using
    monoclonal antibodies (e.g., Regeneron), convalescent plasma, and
    modified antiviral drugs (e.g., Remdesivir, Paxlovid, etc.). In late
    stages, strong corticosteroids (e.g., dexamethasone) have
    demonstrated some value (but limited and not adequate in some
    advanced cases).
-   8. Sadly, but not surprising, theories have been advanced by
    unqualified sources promoting untested medications (e.g.,
    hydroxychloroquine), even dangerous drugs (e.g., Ivermectin) which
    desperate or naïve people grasp as “magic bullets.”
-   9. A bright spot regarding COVID-19 (if not the light at the end of
    the tunnel) is the intense scientific research which is producing
    new drugs and technologies including new methods of RNA screening of
    viruses, new vaccines (to address potential variants), new genetic
    procedures (e.g., CRISPR-Cas13), as well as sophisticated AI
    immunoinformatics (computational immunology) and precision medicine
    strategies.
-   10. There are estimated to be over 380 trillion (10³⁸) viruses on
    planet earth. It doesnot take much imagination to realize that we
    will be living with infectious pandemics for a long time to come.
    Let us hope that perfidious politicians step aside, that humans do
    what’s right, and that we all pray for science to guide us on a safe
    path forward.

References

1. Principles of epidemiology in public health practice . Center for
Disease Control and Prevention; May 18, 2012.

2. Piret J, Boivin G. Pandemics throughout history.  Front Microbiol
. January 15, 2021;11:631736 2021 [Published].

3. Hackett K.M.  New polio cases confirmed in five countries . Precision
Vaccinations; September 4, 2021.

4. Major epidemics of the modern era 1899 – 2021 . Council on Foreign
Relations; June 25, 2021.

5. Global HIV/AIDS overview . HIV.gov; 2021.

6. Pride D. The viruses Inside You.  Sci. Am. December
. 2020;323(6):46–53. doi: 10.1038/scientificamerican1220-46.

7. HIV treatment: the basics . August 16,
2021. ContactUs@HIVinfo.NIH.gov.

8. What are HIV and AIDS . June 5, 2020. ContactUs@HIVinfo.NIH.gov.

9. COVID-19 coronavirus pandemic . Worldometer; April 2, 2021 Last
updated.

10. Coronavirus COVID-19 global cases by the center for systems science
and engineering (CSSE) . Johns Hopkins University; March 27, 2021.

11. Ortaliza J, Orgera K, Twitter K.A, et al.  COVID-19 continues to be
a leading cause of death in the U.S. in September 2021 . KFF Health &
Wellbeing; October 3, 2021.

12. Cui J, Li F, Shi Z.L. Origin and evolution of pathogenic
coronaviruses.  Nat Rev Microbiol . 2019;17(B):181–192.

13. David C, Fajgenbaum D.C, June C.H. Cytokine storm.  N Engl J Med
. December 3, 2020;383:2255–2273 2020.

14. Fan Wu F, Zhao S, Yu B, et al. A new coronavirus associated with
human respiratory disease in China.  Nature . February 3,
2020;579:265–269.

15. Wang S.F, Chen K.H, Chen M, et al. Human-leukocyte antigen class I
Cw 1502 and class II DR 0301 genotypes are associated with resistance to
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) infection.  Viral Immunol
. 2011;24(D):421–426.

16. Zhao J, Zhao J, Mangalam A.K, et al. Airway memory CD4(+) T cells
mediate protective immunity against emerging respiratory coronaviruses. 
Immunity . 2016;44(E):1379–1391.

17. Long Q, Liu B, Deng H, et al. Antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2 in
patients with COVID-19.  Nat Med . 2020;26:845–848.

18. Woodward Davis A.S, Roozen H.N, Dufort M.J, et al. The human
tissue-resident CCR5(+) T cell compartment maintains protective and
functional properties during inflammation.  Sci Transl Med
. 2019;11(521):12 Fan.

19. Zhou P, Yang X.-L, Wang X.-G, et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated
with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin.  Nature . 2020:1–4.

20. Collins F.  Genomic study points to natural origin of COVID-19 . NIH
Director’s Blog; March 26, 2020.

21. Dolan L.  8 big cats have tested positive for coronavirus at the
Bronx Zoo . CNN; April 23, 2020.

22. Hobbs E.C, Reid T.J. Animals and SARS-CoV-2: species susceptibility
and viral transmission in experimental and natural conditions, and the
potential implications for community transmission.  Transbound Emerg Dis
. July, 2021;68(C):1850–1867.

23. Klhůfek J. The role of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 in the
pathogenesis of COVID-19: the villain or the hero?  Acta Clin Belg
. 2020;77(1) 211–18.

24. Cao Y, Li L, Feng Z, et al. Comparative genetic analysis of the
novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV/SARS-137 CoV-2) receptor ACE2 in different
populations.  Cell Discov . 2020;6:1–4.

25. Cao Y, Li L, Feng Z, et al. Comparative genetic analysis of the
novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV/SARS-137 CoV-2) receptor ACE2 in different
populations.  Cell Discov . 2020;6:19 Zhou.

26. Zeberg H, Pääbo S. The major genetic risk factor for severe COVID-19
is inherited from Neanderthals.  Nature . 2020;587:610–612.

27. Dugan H.L, Stamper C.T, Li L, et al. Profiling B cell
immunodominance after SARS-CoV-2 infection reveals antibody evolution to
non-neutralizing viral targets.  Immunity . 2021;54(6):1290–1303.

28. Wang E.Y, Mao T, Klein J, et al. Diverse functional autoantibodies
in patients with COVID-19.  Nature . 2021;595:283–288.

29. Wilson F.P.  The seven symptoms that best predict COVID
. Medscape; September 28, 2021.

30. Huang C, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019
novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China.  Lancet . 2020;395:497–506.

31. Glück T.  Association of comorbidities with COVID-19 outcomes . NEJM
Journal Watch; April 1, 2020.

32. Fox S.E, Li G, Akmatbekov A, et al. Unexpected features of cardiac
pathology in COVID-19 infection.  Circulation
. 2021;142 doi: 10.1161/Circulationaha.120.049465 1123–25.

33. Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, et al. Clinical course and risk factors for
mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a
retrospective cohort study.  Lancet . July 21,
2020;395(10229):1054–1062 2020 Mar 28.

34. Pletz M.W, Blasi F, Chalmers J.D, et al. International perspective
on the new 2019 American thoracic society/infectious diseases society of
America community-acquired pneumonia guideline: a critical appraisal by
a global expert panel.  Chest . November, 2020;158(D):1912–1918.

35. Kass D.A. COVID-19 and severe obesity: a big problem?  Ann Intern
Med . August 12, 2020 doi: 10.7326/M20-5677.

36. Chau C.H, Strope J.D, Figg W.D. COVID-19 clinical diagnostics and
testing technology.  Pharmacotherapy . August, 2020;40(8):857–868.

37. Yeoh Y.K, Zuo T, Lui G.C, et al. Gut microbiota composition reflects
disease severity and dysfunctional immune responses in patients with
COVID-19.  Gut . 2021;70:698–706.

38. Behrmann O, Spiegel M. COVID-19: from rapid genome sequencing to
fast decisions.  Lancet Infect Dis . 2020;20(11):1218.

39. Interim clinical guidance for management of patients with confirmed
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) . NIH: National Center for Immunization
and Respiratory Diseases (NCIRD), Division of Viral Diseases; February
16, 2021.

40. Interim clinical guidance for management of patients with confirmed
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) . NIH: National Center for Immunization
and Respiratory Diseases (NCIRD), Division of Viral Diseases; February
16, 2021:8 Worldmeter.

41. Weinreich D.M, Sivapalasingam S, Norton T, et al.  ) REGEN-COV
antibody combination and outcomes in outpatients with covid-19
. NEJM; September 29, 2021.

42. FDA NEWS RELEASE, .  Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: FDA authorizes
monoclonal antibodies for treatment of COVID-19 . November 21, 2020.

43. Radcliffe S.  Monoclonal antibody treatment for COVID-19:
effectiveness, cost, and more . Healthline; August 25, 2021.

44. Terry M.  Vir biotech IDs two antibodies that could Be effective in
preventing and treating COVID-19 . BioSpace; March 25, 2020. .

45. Chen P, Nirula A, Heller B, et al. SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibody
LY-CoV555 in outpatients with covid-19.  N Engl J Med . January 21,
2021;384(3):229–237.

46. Brouwer P.J.M, Caniels T.G, Van der Straten K, et al. Potent
neutralizing antibodies from COVID-19 patients define multiple targets
of vulnerability.  Science . August 7, 2020;369(6504):643–650.

47. Johnson R.M, Vinetz J.M. Dexamethasone in the management of
covid-19.  BMJ . July 3, 2020;370:m2648.

48. Burki T.K. The role of antiviral treatment in the COVID-19
pandemic.  Lancet . February 2022;10(121–220) e11–2.

49. Paxlovid fact sheet for health care providers. Accessed January 11,
2022. https://www.fda.gov/media/155050.

50. Molnupiravir fact sheet for health care providers. Accessed January
11, 2022. https://www.fda.gov/media/155054.

51. Beigel J.H, Tomashek K.M, Dodd L.E, et al. Remdesivir for the
treatment of Covid-19—final report.  N Engl J Med . November 5,
2020;383:1813–1826.

52. Cavalcanti A.B, Zampieri F.G, Rosa R.G, et al. Hydroxychloroquine
with or without azithromycin in mild-to-moderate covid-19.  NEJM . July
23, 2020 doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2019014.

53. Popp M, Stegemann M, Metzendorf M.I, et al. Ivermectin for
preventing and treating COVID-19.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev . July 28,
2021;7(7):CD015017.

54. COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines, . Antiviral drugs that are approved
or under evaluation for the treatment of
COVID-19. https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/on.

55. Su S, Du L, Jiang S. Learning from the past: development of safe and
effective COVID-19 vaccines.  Nat Rev Microbiol . 2021;19:211–219.

56. Jackson L.A, Anderson E.J, Rouphael N.G, et al. An mRNA Vaccine
against SARS-CoV-2 - Preliminary Report.  N Engl J Med . November 12,
2020;383(20) 1920–31.

57. Supek F, Lehner B, Lindeboom R.G.H. To NMD or not to NMD:
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay in cancer and other genetic diseases. 
Trends Genet . July, 2021;37(7):657–668.

58. NIH vaccine research center leads the way to safe . effective
COVID-19 vaccines; 2021.

59. Ibid. NIH. 58.

60. Aquino-Jarquinab G. Recent progress on rapid SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19
detection by CRISPR-Cas13-based platforms.  Drug Discov Today . August,
2021;26(8):49.

61. Ibid. Jackson. 51.

62. Orlowski E.J.W, Goldsmith D.J.A. Four months into the COVID-19
pandemic, Sweden's prized herd immunity is nowhere in sight.  J R Soc
Med . August, 2020;113(8):292–298.

63. Bergstrom C.T, Dean N.  What the Proponents of ‘Natural’ Herd
Immunity Don't Say Try to reach it without a vaccine, and millions will
die . New York Times; May 1, 2020.

64. Press Release, .  Decoding the human immune system . Human Vaccines
Project; February 13, 2019.

65. Soto C, Bombardi R.G, Branchizio A, et al. High frequency of shared
clonotypes in human B cell receptor repertoires.  Nat vol . February 13,
2019;566:398–402.

66. Ibid. Human Vaccines Project. 62.

67. Niño M.D, Hearne B.N, Cai T. Trajectories of COVID-19 vaccine
intentions among U.S. adults: the role of race and ethnicity.  SSM -
Populat Health . 2021;15:100824. doi: 10.1016/j.ssmph.100824.

68. Oli A.N, Obialor W.O, Ifeanyichukwu M.O, et al. Immunoinformatics
and vaccine development: an overview.  ImmunoTargets Ther
. 2020;26:13–30.

69. Senior A, Jumper J, Hassabis D, et al.  AlphaFold: using AI for
scientific discovery . March 25, 2020 arXiv.org > cs >
arXiv:2003.11336vol. 1.

70. Collins F. Whole-genome sequencing plus AI yield same-day genetic
diagnoses. NIH Director's Blog; May 7, 2019. NIH.gov.

71. Gerson M.  Six takeaways from covid-19 that could shape our future.
Washington Post . February 18, 2021.

72. Wu J. How artificial intelligence can help fight coronavirus. Forbes
Cognitive World; March 19, 2020.

73. Zhang L, Wang D.C, Huang Q. Significance of clinical phenomes of
patients with COVID-19 infection: a learning from 3795 patients in 80
reports.  Clin Transl Med . April 4,
2020;10(1):28–35. doi: 10.1002/ctm2.17.

74. Ong E, Wong M.U, Huffman A, He Y. COVID-19 coronavirus vaccine
design using reverse vaccinology and machine learning.  Preprint bioRxiv
. March 21, 2020 2020;2020.03.20.000141.

75. Chen J, Li K, Zhang Z, et al.  A survey on applications of
artificial intelligence in fighting against COVID-19 . July 4,
2020 arXiv:2007.02202v2.

76. Alimadadi A, Aryal S, Manandhar I, et al. Artificial intelligence
and machine learning to fight COVID-19.  J/Physiolgenom . April 3,
2020 108.252.096.178.

77. Cartelle Gestal M, Dedloff M.R, Torres-Sangiao E. Computational
health engineering applied to model infectious diseases and
antimicrobial resistance spread.  Appl Sci . June 18,
2019;9(12):2486. doi: 10.3390/app9122486.

78.
https://gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/bda7594740fd40299423467b48e9ecf6.

79. Joseph T, Wu J.T, Leung K, Leung G.M. Nowcasting and forecasting the
potential domestic and international spread of the 2019-nCoV outbreak
originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling study.  Lancet . February 29,
2020;395(10225):P689–P697.

80. Zixin H, Qiyang G, Shudi L, et al.  Forecasting and evaluating
intervention of covid-19 in the world . March 22, 2020 arXiv:2003.09800
[q-bio.PE].

81. Heaven W.D.  AI could help with the next pandemic—but not with this
one . MIT Technology Review; March 12, 2020.

82. Waleed A, Preety S, Gupta B.G. Review on machine and deep learning
models for the detection and prediction of Coronavirus.  J Matpr . June
23, 2020;06:245.

83. Maghdid H.S, Ghafoor K.Z, Sadiq A.S, et al.  A novel AI-enabled
framework to diagnose coronavirus COVID 19 using smartphone embedded
sensors: design study . May 30,
2020 doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2003.07434 arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:2003.07434..

84. Ting D.S.W, Carin L, Dzau V, et al. Digital technology and
COVID-19.  Nat Med . March 27, 2020 doi: 10.1038/s41591-020-0824-5.

85. Mei X, Lee H, Diao K, et al. Artificial intelligence–enabled rapid
diagnosis of patients with COVID-19.  Nat Med . 2020;26:1224–1228.

Epilogue

So, just what is “the paradox of the immune system?” As you have
probably concluded by now, the “paradox” is actually a collection of
paradoxes or would-be contradictions, inconsistencies, indeed, even
mysteries of medical and healthcare science involving the immune system.
Just to list some (as I did in the Preface), but not all that I tried to
identify throughout the book (sometimes too often, I'm sure), they
include

1.  • Self versus nonself;
2.  • Innate versus adaptive immunity;
3.  • Adaptive immunity as a friend and foe;
4.  • Our “best friend and worst enemy”;
5.  • Immunity's regulated and dysregulated systems;
6.  • Health protection and health threat;
7.  • Dangerous versus benign nonself and the toll-like receptor (TLR)
    “sentry”;
8.  • Acute inflammation healing and ulceration;
9.  • Acute versus chronic inflammation;
10. • Accumulation of immune (cellular and humoral) substances in
    tissue;
11. • Tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α) inflammatory and antiinflammatory
    effects;
12. • Self versus self (autoimmunity);
13. • Autoimmunity (“the mother of all immune system paradoxes”);
14. • Female versus male predilections to autoimmune diseases and
    cancers;
15. • Rogue B-cell attacking self;
16. • Epitope spreading;
17. • The role of the X chromosome and miRNA in males versus females;
18. • Immunosuppressive agents as therapeutics and as threats;
19. • The immune system and COVID-19 (the infection's best friend and
    worst enemy).

As you have learned while reading this book, this is a rather formidable
list (perhaps a bit confusing) and it only scratched the surface of the
immune system puzzles. Actually, the science of immunology is growing
every day. My greatest challenge and frustration during the past year
that I have spent writing this book has been trying to keep up with the
deluge of new information being produced and published on a daily basis.
I can only hope the book provides a contemporaneous foundation and
framework upon which you can build a better understanding of the
complexities of this enigmatic science that simultaneously protects us
and threatens us (that will be the last paradox I quote—I promise).

Because of the torrent of information, I had to take some liberties
uncommon in a scientific discourse. I eliminated erudite dissertations
on each element of the immune system (I'll bet you do not believe that,
but it is true). Rather, I tried to state the basic biology essential to
understanding immunology (and related genetics) without elaborating on
the excruciating details presented in the literature. Mostly, I tried to
package the science in a comfortable, casual narrative that you the
reader could enjoy rather than labor over as in an academic travail. I
even inserted some degree of intermittent humor (in case you missed it)
to “lighten the load” of the heavy material discussed. No less, as a
part of that levity, in Chapter 4 I requested your support and
petitioning of NIH for my suggested name change from “chronic
inflammation” to “pathomelitis.” I actually do believe there would be
some benefit in such a change, but I'm not too sure my grassroots
campaign will amount to much. Who knows?

Immunology, autoimmune disease, cancer, immunotherapies and regrettably,
pandemics are the kinds of subjects that need a book as an informational
foundation upon which one can continue to build. Like I stated above,
those building blocks are coming at us at light speed (or a fire hose,
the metaphor I used in the Preface). But with them and the continuing
advancements in immunotherapies comes a greater understanding of the
paradoxes, vagaries and the suffering wrought upon humanity by
autoimmune diseases, chronic diseases, cancers and infectious pandemics.
That understanding, along with valuable ameliorators always available to
all, like proper diet, physical exercise, stress reduction, and
certainly, attention to our environment (our “climatinome” – a little
more neologism to add to my “pathomelitis”) are all collectively so
meaningful. While none provide a solution or a “magic bullet,” together
they give us hope.

The information in the book has made you a well-educated, but no less a
student (like all of us) of immunology. Now, it's up to you to maintain
and grow that credential for the benefits it will provide for your
health and to those whom you may help and care for, patients, family,
friends and, humanity at large. In the Introduction to Section 1 of this
book, I talked about my love of immunology and genetics. I also made a
prognostication (maybe more, a hope) when I said, “Some of my
proselytizing about the immune system and genetics in healthcare may not
mean much to you now, but I would ask you to come back and reread this
Introduction after you have read the book (I'll even remind you at the
end). By then, I think you may love immunology and genetics as much as I
do.” I hope I have succeeded.

As we tinker with the immune system, applying immunotherapies,
immunogenetic and immunogenomic, gene editing, gene replacement, stem
cell transplantation, we are tempted to think about, even aspire to
extended life. Sure, we are beginning to see the occasional 95 years old
still jogging or the 100 years old blowing out birthday candles. It
makes us feel like, “I've got a shot” and indeed you do. We can pretty
much thank our immune system for giving us that hope. But as far as
beating the “grim reaper” or immortality, we all pretty much know, “it
ain't gonna happen” in most of our lifetimes. Chronic inflammation,
autoimmunity, cancer (or “cancering”), and all the other immune-related
diseases are all products of “an enemy within us.” The system that
defends most of us, most of our lives, is also the inescapable
collaborator in our “last dance.” Best we accept the paradox of the
immune system by proffering care and empathy to those who suffer its
unkind duplicities as we try to enjoy and be thankful for the benefits
and protection it provides.

Glossary

A

Abatacept (Orencia)    T-cell inhibitor

ACE-2    Angiotensin-converting enzyme protein on the surface of many
cell types and receptor site for novel coronavirus spike protein

Acetylcholine    Chief neurotransmitter of the parasympathetic nervous
system

Acitretin (Soriatane)    Retinoid (used in psoriasis)

Acquired immune system    Active immune system producing antibodies

Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS)    Active HIV infection

Acquired mutations    Change in gene structure causing abnormality in
the human organism

Actemra    TNF inhibitor

Active immunity    Innate and adaptive immunity

Acute    Rapid onset, short duration

Acute inflammation    Clinical reaction in adaptive immune response

Adalimumab (Humira)    Monoclonal antibody drug

Adaptive immune system    Acquired, second-level immunity

Adaptive immunity    Second level of immunity (acquired immunity)

Adenine (As)    Nucleotide base compound in DNA and RNA

Adjuvant chemotherapy    Postoperative chemo to reduce risk of cancer
recurrence

Adoptive cell transfer therapy (ACT therapy)    Treatment of malignant
cancers with CAR-T cells

Adventitia    Outer most layer of the wall of a blood vessel

Agranulocyte cells    Neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils

Algorithms    Rules followed in calculations or other problem-solving
operations

All of Us    Precision Medicine initiative by the National Institute of
Health

Allele    Pairs or series of inherited genes on a chromosome that
determines hereditary characteristics

Allergens    Specific form of antigen that triggers immunoglobin E (IgE)

Allergy    Type IV hypersensitivity response

Allograph    Transplantation from one donor to another of the same
species

AlphaFold    AI Google DeepMind system using amino acid sequencing to
predict protein structure

Amino acid    Building blocks of the large, complex protein molecules

Amino acids    Building block molecules of proteins

Aminosalicylates (mesalamine, Asacol HD, Delzicol, others)
   Antiinflammatory drugs

Anakinra (Kineret)    Immunotherapeutic biologic drug

Anamnestic memory    Renewed rapid production of an antibody following
second or later contact with the provoking antigen or with related
antigens.

Anaphylactic shock    Life-threatening hypersensitivity reaction

Angiogenesis inhibitors    Block production of new blood vessels

Angioplasty    Surgical repair or unblocking of a blood vessel,

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)    Controls blood pressure by
regulating the volume of fluids in the body. Also binds spike proteins
in SARS-CoV-2.

Anthralin    Treatment in psoriasis

Anti-anti-idiotype    Second antibody in the Idiotype Regulatory Circuit

Antiidiotype    First antibody in the Idiotype Regulatory Circuit

Antiinflammatory medications    Drugs to treat acute inflammation

Antimetabolites    Suppress DNA synthesis

Anti-TNF (tumor necrosis factor)    Proinflammatory cytokine

Antibiotic    Treatment for bacterial infection

Antibodies    Protein produced in response to and counteracting a
specific antigen

Antibody    Cellular component of the immune response

Antibody-encoding gene    Determines how our immune system attempts to
protect us against antigens

Anticoagulant medications (e.g., heparin, warfarin)    Medication to
reduce clotting

Antigen    Foreign, nonself-substance or stress

Antigen presenting complex (APC)    Antigen bound to a macrophage and
T cell

Antigenic determinants    Small sites on antigen surface called epitopes

Antinuclear antibody (ANA)    Antibodies that can bind to a normal cell
nucleus

Antiviral drugs    Boost the immune defense to inhibit viral development

Apoptosis    Cell's ability to selfdestruct when something goes wrong

Apoptosis inducers    Promote apoptotic effects through a variety of
mechanisms

Apremilast (Otezla)    Treatment of moderate to severe plaque psoriasis

Artificial intelligence (AI)    Computer algorithms mimicking human
thinking and learning

Aspirin    Acetylsalicylic acid (ASA)

Asthma    Chronic, long-term condition that intermittently inflames and
swells the airways

Atenolol (Tenormin)    Beta blocker in treatment of Grave's disease

Atezolizumab (Tecentriq)    Monoclonal antibody drug

Atherogenesis    Accumulation of cholesterol or plaques in the arteries

Autoantibodies    Antibodies generated by a person's own body

Autoantigen    Normal bodily constituent against which the immune system
produces autoantibodies.

Autoantigenicity    Relating to autoantigens

Autoimmune disease    Category of immune diseases of unknown origin
(originating through selfantigenicity)

Autoimmunity    Misdirected immune response that occurs when the immune
system attacks the body itself.

Autologous    From “one's self”, for example, hematopoietic stem cell

Autologous CAR-T-cell therapy    Targeted lymphocytes are then
reintroduced to the patient's body through a single infusion to attack
tumor cells

Autologous transplantation    Healthy stem cells collected from the
blood or bone marrow before treatment then given back to the patient
after treatment.

Autosomal dominant allele    Determine hereditary characteristics

Autosomal recessive allele    Two copies of an abnormal gene must be
present for the disease or trait to develop

Avelumab (Bavencio)    Monoclonal antibody drug

Azathioprine (Azasan, Imuran)    Immunosuppressant drug

B

B-cell lymphocytes    See nongranular leukocytes

B-memory cell (B_(M))    Immune cell with an affinity for a particular
antigen

Balsalazide (Colazal)    Antiinflammatory drug

Baricitinib (Olumiant)    Immunotherapeutic DMARD drug

Base compounds    Nucleotides Adenine (A), Cytosine (C), Guanine (G),
Thymine (T)

Base pair    Nucleotide amino acid base compounds on a gene
(collectively called the human exome)

Basophils    Agranulocyte white blood cell

Belimumab (Benlysta)    Monoclonal antibody drug

Bioinformatics    The science of collecting and analyzing complex
biological data

Biologics    Products made from living organisms or contain components
of living organisms

Biomarkers    Phenotypic features for any measurable quantity or score
that can be used as a basis to stratify patients

Biomedical informatics    Data used in big data analytics

Bioscience    Any branch of natural and life science

Blinatumomab (Blincyto)    Monoclonal antibody drug

BlueDot    AI-powered algorithm to analyze information that can track
over a hundred infectious diseases

Bone marrow transplant    Transplanting blood stem cells, which travel
to the bone marrow where they produce new blood cells and promote growth
of new marrow.

Brachytherapy    Radiation therapy is used to treat many types of cancer

Bradykinin    Potent endothelium-dependent vasodilators

BRCA1    Cancer gene associated with breast cancer

BRCA2    Cancer gene associated with breast cancer

Budesonide    Inhaled steroid used to prevent asthma symptoms

C

C-reactive protein (CRP)    Increases with heart disease

Calcineurin inhibitors    Immunomodulating agents used in treatment of
psoriasis

Calcipotriene    Vitamin D analog used in treatment of psoriasis

Calcitriol (Vectical)    Vitamin D analog used in treatment of psoriasis

Calor    Heat generation during acute inflammation (or fever in chronic
inflammation)

Cancer    Group of diseases involving abnormal cell growth with the
potential to invade or spread to other parts of the body

Cancering    Verb describing mutations leading to cancer

CANTOS    Canakinumab Antiinflammatory Thrombosis Outcomes Study

CAR-T cell    Chimeric antigen receptor T cells (gene replacement
therapy)

Carcinogenesis    Cancer causing

Carcinogenesis    Series of mutations in an oncogene

Carcinogens    Substances capable of causing cancer in living tissue.

Carcinoid tumors    Slow-growing cancer that can arise throughout the
body

Carcinoma    A cancer that starts in the skin or the tissues that line
other organs

Cardiovascular disease    Diseases relating to heart and blood vessels

Cas13 enzyme    Guide RNAs used in CRISPR technique for possible
COVID-19 vaccine

Cas9 enzyme    Acts as a pair of “molecular scissors” that can cut the
two strands of DNA at a specific location in the genome

Caseation    Form of necrosis producing cheese mass of tissue

CD (cluster of deviation)    Cell surface glycoprotein expressed on
leukocytes and other cells relevant for the immune system (CD3, 4, 8,
19, up to 400)

CDC    Center for Disease Control

Cemiplimab (Libtayo)    Monoclonal antibody drug

Central dogma of molecular biology    Protein synthesis; DNA makes RNA,
and RNA makes protein

Centromere    Point of attachment of two chromatids (on chromosome)

Cerebrovascular disease    Diseases relating to the central nervous
system and its vasculature system

Certolizumab (Cimzia)    Monoclonal antibody drug

Checkpoint inhibitor    Monoclonal antibody drug

Checkpoint inhibitors    Immunotherapeutic cancer treatment by blocking
certain proteins

Chemotactic    Orientation or movement of an organism or cell in
relation to chemical agents

Chemotaxis    Phenomenon whereby somatic cells, bacteria, and other
single-cell or multicellular organisms direct their movements in
response to certain chemicals in their environment

Chemotherapy    Use drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells

Chimeric    Organism or tissue that contains at least two different sets
of DNA

Chimeric antigen receptor T cells (CAR-T cells)    T cells that have
been genetically engineered to produce an artificial T-cell receptor for
use in immunotherapy

Chromosome    Threadlike structure of nucleic acids and protein found in
the nucleus of most living cells, carrying genetic information in the
form of genes.

Chronic disease    Conditions that last 1year or more and require
ongoing medical attention or limit activities of daily living or both;
for example, heart disease, cancer, diabetes

Chronic inflammation    Extended or permanent clinical manifestation of
acquired immune disorders; considered the underlying cause of all human
disease

Ciprofloxacin (Cipro)    Broad-spectrum fluoroquinolone

Cladribine (Mavenclad)    Antimetabolite antineoplastic agent

Clinical autoimmune cycle    Autoimmune cycle induced by chronic
inflammation

Clobetasol (Temovate)    A corticosteroid

Cloning    Generating a genetically identical copy of a cell or an
organism

Clonotypes    Unique sequences of nucleotides (DNA base compounds)

Cluster    Disease outbreak grouped in a specific place

Comorbidity    see Concurrent Medical Conditions

Computational immunology    Immunoinformatics

Concurrent Medical Conditions    Comorbidity or multimorbidity

Contact tracing    Identifying persons exposed to infectious risk

Convalescent plasma (serum)    Antibody rich plasma from previously
infected victim

Convolutional neural network    Trained deep learning algorithm

Core processor    CPU unit that executes multiple instructions
simultaneously

Corticosteroids    Class of antiinflammatory medications

COVID-19    Highly contagious respiratory disease caused by the
SARS-CoV-2 virus

CRISPR-Cas9 and 13    acronym for clustered regularly interspaced short
palindromic repeats with RNA guides targeting specific spots in the
genome associated protein 9 or 13 (gene editing)

Crohn's disease (CD)    Autoimmune gastrointestinal inflammatory disease

Cyclooxygenase    Enzyme in inflammatory cascade responsible for
formation of prostanoids

Cyclosporine (Sandimmune, Neoral, Gengraf)    Calcineurin inhibitor

Cystic fibrosis    Hereditary disease that affects the lungs and
digestive system

Cytogenetics    Study of inheritance in relation to the structure and
function of chromosomes.

Cytokine    Chemical components of the immune system

Cytokine storm    Excessive production of cytokines secondary to Type I
hypersensitivity reaction or chronic inflammation

Cytokines    Substances and chemicals secreted by certain cells of the
immune system and have an effect on other cells

Cytosine [Cs]    Base nucleic acids that pairs with guanine in DNA

Cytotoxic    Toxic to living cells

D

Damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs)    Accumulation of cellular
damage

Deep learning    Algorithms in layers to create an artificial neural
network (ANN)

Degranulation    Mast cell neutralizing process

Demographics    Statistical data relating to population and particular
groups within it

Dendritic cell    Antigen presenting cell (Macrophage, T-cell and
antigen)

Deoxyribonucleic acid    DNA

Dexamethasone    Powerful corticosteroid

Diabetes insipidus    An uncommon disorder that causes an imbalance of
fluids in the body

Diabetes Mellitus Type 2 (originally, Adult Diabetes)    Glucose (sugar)
collects in the blood (hyperglycemia) and does not reach the cells

Diabetes Type 1 (originally, Juvenile Diabetes)    Autoimmune
destruction of the pancreatic beta cells, which is caused by unknown
factors

Diapedesis    Extravasation of blood cells through the intact walls of
the capillaries

Dimethyl fumarate (Tecfidera)    Treatment for multiple sclerosis

Diroximel fumarate (Vumerity)    Treatment for multiple sclerosis

Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs)    Immunosuppressive drug
category

DNA    Deoxyribonucleic acid, the carrier of genetic information

DNA base compounds    Adenine (A), Cytosine (C), Guanine (G), and
Thymine (T)

DNA editing    Direct manipulation of DNA sequences in cells

DNA sequencing    Determine the order of DNA proteins (nucleotides) in
an individual's genetic code

Dolor    Pain in the acute inflammatory process

Dominant alleles (AA)    Gene that will produce a certain phenotype,
even in the presence of other alleles

Double helix    DNA molecules made of two twisting, paired strands

Down syndrome    Genetic disorder caused by the presence of all or part
of a third copy of chromosome 21 (Trisomy 21)

Downregulate    Process of reducing or suppressing a response to a
stimulus

Duchenne muscular dystrophy    Severe type of muscular dystrophy

Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)    Breast cancer

Durvalumab (Imfinzi)    Monoclonal antibody drug

Dysbiosis    Imbalance between the types of organism present in

Dysregulate    Abnormal adaptive immune response

Dysregulated    Adaptive immune response

E

Eculizumab (Soliris)    Monoclonal antibody drug

Edema    Abnormal accumulation of fluid or gases in tissue

ELAM    Endothelial adhesion molecule (in inflammatory cascade)

Embryology    Study of embryos and their development.

Embryonic stem cell (ESC)    Pluripotent, undifferentiated stem cell
capable of generating all of the body's cell types

Enbrel    TNF inhibitor

Endemic    Expected level of observable disease found in a community

Endocarditis    Inflammation of endocardium (lining of heart chambers
and valves

Endogenous    Originating from within an organism.

Endothelial leukocytic adhesion molecule    ELAM

Endothelial lining    Lining of interior surface of blood vessels and
lymphatic vessels

Eosinophils    Agranulocyte white blood cell common in allergic reaction

Epidemic    Widespread occurrence of an infectious disease in a
community or country at a particular time

Epidemiology    Branch of medicine which deals with the incidence,
distribution, and possible control of diseases and other factors
relating to health.

Epigenetics    Changes in organisms caused by modification of gene
expression

Epigenome    Chemical modifications to DNA-associated proteins in the
cell, which alter gene expression, and are heritable

Epitope spreading    Release of selfantigens during a chronic autoimmune
or inflammatory response.

Epitopes    Small sites on antigen surface (antigen determinants)

Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV)    One of the most common human viruses (causes
mononucleosis)

Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, or sed rate)    Blood test that
detects and monitors inflammation in the body

Escapees    15% of genes that “escape” XCI

Etanercept (Enbrel)    Biologic drug (TNF inhibitor)

Eugenics    Practice of improving the human species by selectively
mating

Exocytosis    Active transport in which a cell transports molecules out
of the cell

Exome    Part of the genome composed of exons

Exon    Portion of a gene that codes for amino acids

Exposome    Nongenetic exposures that affect human health and disease

Expression    Regulated activity of a gene

F

Feedback inhibition    Removal of antigen reduces innate immune stimulus

Fever    Inflammatory heat (calor) caused by leukocytic pyrogen

Fibroblast    Connective tissue cell

Fingolimod (Gilenya)    Immunosuppressive drug in treatment of multiple
sclerosis

Fluvoxamine    Antidepressant drug used as an antiviral

Functio laesa    Loss of function secondary to inflammation

G

Gene    Basic unit of heredity, a sequence of nucleotides in DNA or RNA
that encodes the synthesis of a gene product, either RNA or protein

Gene editing    Type of genetic engineering in which DNA is inserted,
deleted, modified or replaced in the genome (e.g., CRISPR-Cas9)

Gene expression    Effect attributed to a particular gene

Gene expression modulation    Practice of altering the expression of a
gene

Gene mutation    Change in base compound sequencing

Gene replacement therapy    Applying a piece of DNA in its correct form
though a viral vector (CAR-T cell therapy)

Gene sequencing    Ordering of base compound pairs (adenine paired with
thymine and guanine paired with cytosine).

Gene signature    Gene expression or number of RNA molecules they
produce

Genetic and hereditary disorders    Inherited disorders

Genetic cloning    The processes used to create an exact genetic replica
of another cell, tissue or organism

Genetic code    Nucleotide triplets of DNA and RNA molecules that carry
genetic information

Genetic engineering or modification    Modification of the
characteristics of an organism by manipulating its genetic material

Genetic testing    Tests to identify changes in chromosomes, genes, or
proteins

Genome    An organism's complete set of DNA, including all of its genes

Genome-wide association studies (GWAs)    research to associate specific
genetic variations with particular diseases

Genomic medicine    Clinical science that attempts to build individual
strategies for diagnostic or therapeutic decision-making

Genomics    Study of genes and their functions

Genotype    Organism's complete set of genetic material

Germ cell tumors    Growths that form from reproductive cells

Germline genetic modification    Ability to change an organism's DNA

Giant-cell arteritis    Inflammatory disease affecting the large blood
vessels of the scalp, neck, and arms

Glatiramer acetate (Copaxone, Glatopa)    Immunomodulator medication
used to treat multiple sclerosis

Gliptins (DPP-4 inhibitors)    Work by preventing the breakdown of a
naturally occurring hormone called GLP-1 in type 2 diabetes

GLP-1 agonists    For type 2 diabetes, act similarly to the natural
hormone GLP-1 (see gliptins)

Goeckerman therapy    Coal tar treatment with UVB light therapy

Golimumab (Simponi)    Monoclonal antibody drug

Google's DeepMind Health    Precision medicine program

Granular leukocytes    Eosinophils, neutrophils, and basophils

Granuloma    Collection of inflammatory cells

Graphic processing units (GPUs)    Specialized electronic circuit
designed to rapidly manipulate and alter memory to accelerate the
creation of images

Grave's disease    Autoimmune disorder that causes hyperthyroidism, or
overactive thyroid

Guanine [Gs]    Base compound of DNA and RNA

Guardian of the genome    p53 protein (prevents mutations from being
passed on to subsequent cells)

Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS)    Disorder in which body's immune system
attacks nerves

H

Haploid strands    Single set of chromosomes

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori)    Risk of stomach cancer

Helix    Corkscrew configuration—double in DNA and single in RNA
molecules

Hematopoietic stem cell therapy    Stem cell transplantation procedure

Heparin    Substance that slows the formation of blood clots

Hepatitis B Virus and Hepatitis C Virus (HCV)    Viruses that increase
the risk of liver cancer

Herd immunity    Protection from infectious disease that occurs when a
sufficient percentage of a population has become immune to an infection

Heredity    The passing on of physical or mental characteristics
genetically from one generation to another

Heterozygous    One recessive and one dominant allele

Heuristic    Trial and error, intuitive or “rule of thumb”

Histamine    Vasodilator in Type IV allergic reaction

Histopathology    Study of changes in tissues caused by disease

Hives    See Urticaria

Hodgkin's lymphoma    Highly curable malignancy of lymphatic tissues

Homeostasis    A relatively stable equilibrium between interdependent
elements, especially as maintained by physiological processes

Homograph    Transplantation from one donor to another of the same
species (see allograph)

Homozygous    Two recessive alleles

Human Genome Project    Complete mapping of the human DNA sequencing

Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)    Risk of Kaposi sarcoma, lymphomas
(including both non-Hodgkin lymphoma and Hodgkin disease), and cancers
of the cervix, anus, lung, liver, and throat

Human leukocytic antigen (HLA)    Group of related proteins encoded by
the major histocompatibility complex (MHC Class 1 and 2) gene complex

Human Papillomaviruses (HPVs)    Viruses that increase risk of all
cervical cancers and penile cancers;

Human T-Cell Leukemia/Lymphoma Virus Type 1 (HTLV-1)    Viruses that
increase risk of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL);

Human Vaccines Project    Combining systems biology with artificial
intelligence to understand one of the greatest human immune systems

Humoral    Blood-related serum and fluids that carry WBCs, B and T
lymphocytes, and chemical components like cytokines

Hybridoma technology    Method for producing large amounts of identical
antibodies

Hydrocortisone    Corticosteroid

Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil)    Biologic used unsuccessfully as an
antiviral against novel coronavirus but quite successfully as an
antihelminth

Hydroxyurea (Droxia, Hydrea)    Treatment for psoriasis

Hygiene hypothesis    Continuing human effort to “clean” everything

Hyperplasia    Increase in cell number

Hypersensitivity response    Allergic Type IV IgE response

Hypertrophy    Increase in the size of cells

Hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis    Responsible for cortisol
production

I

Ibuprofen    Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID)

Idiotype    A set of antigen-binding sites which characterizes the
antibodies produced by a particular clone of antibody-producing cells.

Idiotype network theory (INT)    B-cell idiotype circulatory loop

Idiotype-Anti-idiotype Regulatory Circuit (or Loop)    A regulatory
network, which is based on Idiotype–anti-Idiotype B-cell cloning

Idiotypic epitopes    Genetically cloned antibodies with unique profiles
from B-cell idiotype circulatory loop

Immune synapse    MHC receptors activate and bind the individual's T_(H)
cells to the antigens and the macrophage's surface receptors

Immune system    Complex network of cells, tissues, and organs serving
as primary defense system of the human body

Immunity    Ability of the human body to recognize self versus nonself

Immunize    Stimulating neutralizing antibodies to the source of an
infection.

Immuno-oncology    Study and development of treatments using the immune
system to fight cancer

Immunocompromised    Impaired immune system

Immunodeficiency    Lack of immune response to antigen

Immunogenetics    Branch of medical genetics that explores the
relationship between the immune system and genetics.

Immunogenomics    Adding, for each of us, the millions of uniquely
randomized T- and B-cell receptor genes that encode our immune
repertoires

Immunoglobulin E (IgE)    Hypersensitivity, allergic immune reaction

Immunoinformatics    Bioinformation of immune system

Immunology    Study of the structures and functions of the immune system

Immunome    Set of genes and proteins that constitute the immune system

Immunomics    Immune system regulation and response to pathogens using
genome-wide approaches

Immunomodulators    Non-specific drug categories that suppress or
stimulate the immune system

Immunopathology    Study of the immune systems response to disease

Immunopharmacology    Dealing with drugs acting on the immune system and
with the pharmacological actions of substances derived from the immune
system

Immunosenescence    Immune system regarding aging

Immunosuppression    Decreased (suppressed) immune system

Immunotherapeutics    Biologic drugs, agents, and procedures related to
the immune system

In silico    Research conducted by means of computer modeling or
computer simulation in the same group are more similar to each other
than the points in the other groups

Incidence    Frequency of new occurrences of a medical disorder in the
studied population at risk

inDelphi    Algorithm to predict DNA repairs through Cas9

Independent variables    Variable (often denoted by x) whose variation
does not depend on that of another.

Induration    Hardening due to chronic edema

Infectious Disease Vulnerability Index    AI modeling studies of
“nowcasting” and forecasting COVID-19 disease activity throughout the
world

Infiltration    Diffusion or accumulation (in a tissue or cells) of
foreign substances or in amounts in excess of the normal

Inflammaging    Inflammatory process as a product of aging

Inflammation    Acute or chronic clinical response of the acquired
immune response characterized by reddened (“rubor”), hot (“calor”),
swelling (“tumor”), and pain (“dolor”)

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)    Autoimmune inflammatory disease of
the colon

Inflammatory cascade    Pharmacodynamic development wherein the human
immune system has not yet evolved a specific response

Infliximab (Remicade)    Monoclonal antibody drug

Innate (aka natural) immune response    Immediate nonspecific defense
mechanism in response to an antigen

Innate immune system    Natural (healthy) defense system of the body

Insulin    Hormone produced in the pancreas by the islets of Langerhans,
which regulates the amount of glucose in the blood

Interferon    Immune system cytokine

Interleukins    Immune system cytokine

Ipilimumab (Yervoy)    Monoclonal antibody drug

Isoantigens    Histocompatibility (HLA) gene

itis    Suffix for inflammation

Ivermectin    Antiparasitic drug ysed as an antiviral

Ixekizumab (Taltz)    Monoclonal antibody drug

K

Kahler disease    Damage and weakened bones in Multiple Myeloma

Karyotype    Overall number and shape of all your chromosomes

Kynurenine pathways    Regulators of cancer immunity

L

Leflunomide (Arava)    Pyrimidine synthesis inhibitor

Lefluomide    See DMARD

Leukemia    A cancer of bone marrow; creates abnormal WBCs

Leukocytes    White cells that help the body fight bacteria and
infection

Leukocytic pyrogen    Heat producing mediator produced by interleukin

Ligand    A molecule that binds to another molecule

Lipoxygenase    Enzymes that catalyze fatty acids in inflammatory
cascade

Lonpinavir    Antiviral protease inhibitor use for HIV and with Paxlovid

Lymphatic system    Network of tissues and organs that help rid the body
of toxins, waste, and other unwanted materials

Lymphocytes (T_(H),T_(S),T_(C),T_(M) and B, B_(M))    Cellular component
of the immune system

Lymphoma    Cancers of the immune system causing abnormal lymphocytes to
become lymphoma cells

Lysing    Outer boundary or cell membrane is broken down

M

Machine learning    Principal learning process in AI

Macrophage    Large phagocytic white blood cell

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC Class 1 and 2) genes    Genetic
system that allows large proteins in immune system cells to identify
compatible or foreign proteins (Class 1 with T_(C) CD8 receptors and
Class 2 with T_(H) CD4 receptors)

Malignant    Cancer

Masking effect    Steroid reduction of inflammatory symptoms

Melanoma    Pigmented malignant tumor

Mendelian disorders    Mutation at a single genetic locus

Mercaptopurine (Purinethol, Purixan)    Immunosuppressant in treatment
of IBD

Merkel cell carcinoma    Rare type of skin cancer as flesh or blue
coloration on face (neuroendocrine carcinoma)

MERS-CoV    Middle east respiratory virus

Messenger RNA (mRNA)    Transcribes genetic information from DNA as a
sequence of bases is transferred to a ribosome.

Metastasis    Spreading of cancer cells

Metastatic cancer    Disseminated cancer

Methotrexate (Trexall, Xatmep, others)    Purine metabolism inhibitor,
immunosuppressant in IBD (See DMARDs)

Methylprednisolone (Medrol)    Corticosteroid

Metoprolol (Lopressor, Toprol-XL)    Bet blocker used in treatment of
Grave's disease

Metronidazole (Flagyl)    Antibiotic used in IBD

Microbiome    Genetic material of all the microbes—bacteria, fungi,
protozoa, and viruses—that live on and inside the human body

Microbiota    Microorganisms found in a particular habitat (in
microbiome)

Microchimerism    Presence of genetically distinct cells in an
individual

microRNA    Associated with the X chromosome

Moderna    Vaccine manufacturer (mRNA-1273)

Molecular biology    Branch of biology that deals with the structure and
function of the macromolecules (e.g., proteins and nucleic acids)
essential to life.

Molecular genetic tests    Gene tests

Molecular genetics    Molecular biology of genetics

Molecular radiotherapy    Targeted radionuclide therapy

Molecularly targeted therapies    Cancer treatment

Molnupiravir    Antiviral nucleoside analogue

Monoclonal antibodies    Immune system modulators

Monocytes    See nongranular leukocytes

mRNA    Messenger ribonucleic acid

Multiomics    Genotype-phenotype data through genome-wide association
studies (GWAS)

Multimorbidity    see Concurrent Medical Conditions

Multiple myeloma    Cancers that begin in plasma cells and form tumors
in bone marrow (see Kahler disease)

Multiple sclerosis (MS)    Autoimmune demyelinating disease
(encephalomyelitis disseminate)

Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C)    Chronic
inflammation in multiple organ systems, especially in children

Mutation    Changing of the structure of a gene, resulting in a variant
form that may be transmitted to subsequent generations, caused by the
alteration of single base units in DNA, or the deletion, insertion, or
rearrangement of larger sections of genes or chromosomes; see gene
mutation

Myasthenia gravis (MG)    Autoimmune disease characterized by weakness
and rapid fatigue of any of the muscles under your voluntary control

Mycophenolate (Cellcept)    Immunosuppressant to treat myasthenia gravis

Myocarditis    Inflammation of heart muscles (myocardium)

N

Nadolol (Corgard)    Beta blocker to treat Grave's disease

Naproxen    A nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID)

National Cancer Institute    U.S. government's principal agency for
cancer research

National Institute of Health (NIH)    U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, NIH is the largest biomedical research agency in the
world

Natural immune system    Innate immune system

Natural killer [NK] cells    WBC immune cell that has granules (small
particles) with enzymes that can kill tumor cells or cells infected with
a virus

Naught point    Null point for infectious spreading (R₀)

Necrosis    Death of body tissue

Neoadjuvant chemotherapy    Treatment given as a first step to shrink a
tumor before the main treatment

Neoplasm    A new and abnormal growth of tissue in some part of the
body, especially as a characteristic of cancer

Neoplastic    Relating to a neoplasm or neoplasia

Neostigmine (Bloxiverz)    Cholinesterase inhibitors in treatment of
myasthenia gravis

Neuroendocrine tumors    See Merkel cell carcinoma

Neutralizing antibodies    Defends a cell from a pathogen or infectious
particle by neutralizing any effect it has biologically

Neutrophils    Type of white blood cell that helps heal damaged tissues
and resolve infections

Next-generation sequencing or next-gen sequencing (NGS)    A
high-throughput method used to determine a portion of the nucleotide
sequence of an individual's genome; see Sanger Method

Nivolumab (Opdivo)    Monoclonal antibody drug

Non-Hodgkin lymphoma    cancer that starts in lymphocytes (WBCs)

Non-specific therapies    Generalized immunosuppressive and
immunomodulating (suppressing or stimulating) therapies

Nonself    Antigen

Normal flora    Microorganisms that live on another living organism
without causing disease

Novel coronavirus (nCoV)    A new strain of coronavirus that has not
been previously identified in humans

NSAIDs    Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; see aspirin, ibuprofen,
naproxen

Nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB)    Transcription factor involved in
inflammatory and immune responses

Nucleic acids    Complex organic substance present in living cells,
especially DNA or RNA, whose molecules consist of many nucleotides
linked in a long chain

Nucleotide bases    Adenine (As), thymine (Ts), guanine (Gs), and
cytosine (Cs)

O

Olsalazine (Dipentum)    Antiinflammatory drug

Oncoevolution    Cell transformation into a neoplastic cell

Oncogene    A gene that can transform a normal cell into a neoplastic
cell

Oncogenesis    Process through which healthy cells become transformed
into cancer cells

Oncology    Study and treatment of cancer and tumors

Opsinization    Altering of bacteria by opsonins so as to become more
readily and more efficiently engulfed by phagocytes

Organ morphogenesis    The biological process that causes a cell, tissue
or organism to develop its shape

Osteoarthritis    Protective cartilage that cushions the ends of your
bones wears down over time (most common form of arthritis)

Outbreak    Sudden rise in expected level of disease

Overshoot    Continued infection after R0 Naught

P

p53    Protein that prevents mutations from being passed on to
subsequent cells (called “Guardian of the Genome”)

PALB2    Gene for breast cancer

Pandemic    A disease prevalent over the whole world

Passive immunity    Immunity which results from the introduction of
antibodies from another person (e.g., mother to fetus in utero)

Pathogen    Microorganism causing disease

Pathogenesis    Natural history of a disease

Pathology    The bioscience of the causes and effects of diseases,
especially the branch of medicine that deals with the laboratory
examination of samples of body tissue for diagnostic or forensic
purposes

Pathophysiology    The disordered physiological processes associated
with disease or injury

Paxlovid    Antiviral protease inhibitor drug

PCR    Polymerase chain reaction viral antigen diagnostic test

PD 1 and 2    Programmed cell death protein inhibitors

PD-L1    Ligand on cancer cell

Pembrolizumab (Keytruda)    Monoclonal antibody drug

Peripherals    Any external device that provides input and output for
the computer

Perivasculitis    Inflammation of the adventitia of a blood vessel or a
lymphatic vessel or of the tissues surrounding it

Personalized health care    Precision health care

Personalized medicine    Precision medicine

Pfizer    Vaccine manufacturer (BNT162b2)

Phagocyte    Free-living one-celled organism that ingests or engulfs
other cells or particles

Phagocytize    To ingest bacteria or other material

Phagocytosis    Process by which certain living cells called phagocytes
ingest or engulf other cells or particles

Pharmacodynamics    Branch of pharmacology concerned with the effects of
drugs and the mechanism of their action

Pharmacoeconomics    Branch of health economics which deals with
identifying, measuring, and comparing the costs and consequences of
pharmaceutical products and services

Pharmacogenetics    Study of how people respond differently to drug
therapy based upon their genetic makeup or genes

Pharmacogenomics    Study how an individual's genome can impact their
responses to medication

Pharmacovigilance    The practice of monitoring the effects of medical
drugs after they have been licensed for use, especially to identify and
evaluate previously unreported adverse reactions.

Phenotype    How a trait—genotype—shows on your physical body

Phenotype trigger    Environmental factors combining with specific genes
to produce a clinical manifestation (e.g., cancer in smoking)

Phylogeny    Evolution of a species or group

Physical distancing    See Social distancing

Pimecrolimus (Elidel)    Calcineurin inhibitor used in treatment of
psoriasis

Plaquenil    Hydroxychloroquine

Plasma    Liquid portion of blood (serum)

Plasma cell myeloma    See Kahler disease

Plasma cells    Fully differentiated B cell that produces a single type
of antibody

Plasmapheresis    Process in which plasma is separated from the blood
cells

Plasmid vector    Vehicles used to drive recombinant DNA into a host
cell in molecular cloning

Platelets    See thrombocytes

Pleiotropic    One gene influences two or more

Pluripotent stem cells    Cells that can undergo selfrenewal and give
rise to all cells of the tissues of the body

Polyarthritis    Five or more joints are affected with joint pain

Polydipsia    Increased thirst

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)    Molecular test to detects genetic
material of virus using a lab technique

Polymorphism    Genetic alterations that occur in more than 1 percent of
the population

Polymorphonuclear (PMN)    A leukocyte with a variable formed nucleus
(e.g., neutrophil)

Polyphagia    Excessive or extreme hunger

Polyuria    Frequent urination

Precision health    See precision medicine

Precision medicine    Looks at the genetics, environment, and lifestyle
of a person in order to select best treatment

Precision Medicine Initiative (PMI)    A long-term research project,
involving the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and multiple other
research centers, which aims to understand how a person's genetics,
environment, and lifestyle can help determine the best approach to
prevent or treat disease

Predictive analytics    Identifying mutations that increase a person's
risk

Prednisone    Corticosteroid

Prevalence    Proportion of persons in a population who have a
particular disease or attribute

Preventive mastectomy    Preventive (prophylactic) surgical removal of
breast at high risk of cancer (e.g., BRCA1, BRCA2, or PALB2 gene)

Pro-inflammatory cytokine    Type of signaling molecule that is secreted
from immune cells like helper T cells (Th) and macrophages, and certain
other cell types that promote inflammation.

Probiotics    Microorganism introduced into the body for its beneficial
qualities

Progenitor    Originating cause

Programmed death (PD) protein    Plays a major role in suppressing the
immune system during the formation of the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway, which
transmits an inhibitory signal to reduce T-cell activity

Prophylactic    Preventative

Propranolol (Inderal, InnoPran XL)    Beta blocker in treatment of
Grave's disease

Propylthiouracil    Anti-thyroid medication

Prostaglandins    Group of compounds with varying hormone-like effects

Protease    Enzyme which breaks down proteins and peptides.

Protein synthesis    Process in which cells make proteins (see Central
dogma of molecular biology)

Proteoglycan    Protein bonded to glycosaminoglycan group

Proteolysis    Breakdown by protease of proteins or peptides into amino
acids

Proteome    Gene protein

Proteomics    Biochemistry, functions, and interactions or proteomes
within the body

Proto-oncogenes    Genes that promote cell growth and cellular division

Protocols    Procedure or system of rules governing actions

Psoriasis    Autoimmune disease that causes skin disorder whereby skin
cells multiply up to 10times faster than normal

Public health    branch of medicine dealing with public health,
including hygiene, epidemiology, governmental support, and disease
prevention

Pus    Opaque liquid produced in infected tissue, consisting of dead
white blood cells (neutrophils) and bacteria with tissue debris and
serum

Pyridostigmine (Mestinon, Regonal)    Cholinesterase inhibitor in
treatment of myasthenia gravis

R

R-Naught (R_(O) or RO)    Null point for infectious spreading

Radiation therapy    Type of cancer treatment that uses beams of intense
energy to kill cancer cells.

Radioactive iodine (I-131)    Treatment for Grave's disease

Radiogenomics    Radiographic image analysis used to predict underlying
genotypic traits

Radiography    The process or occupation of taking radiographs to assist
in medical examinations

Radiomics    Information from large datasets of qualitative and
quantitative imaging

Recessive    Gene is a gene that can be masked by a dominant gene

Recessive alleles (aa)    When present on its own will not affect the
individual. Recombinant: Genetic material formed by recombination (e.g.,
recombinant DNA)

Regenerative medicine    The process of replacing or “regenerating”
human cells, tissues, or organs to restore or establish normal function;
see Stem cells

Regression    Measure of the relation between the mean value of one
variable (e.g. output) and corresponding values of other variables

Regulated immune system    Innate (natural) immune system

Remdesivir    Antiviral drug that interferes with coronavirus mechanism

Remicade    TNF inhibitor

Replacement therapy    CAR-T cell replacement therapy

Retinoids    Vitamin A based therapy to reduce epithelial growth (in
psoriasis)

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)    Common autoimmune disease affecting joints

Rheumatoid factor    Immune proteins that can attack healthy tissue

Ribonucleic acid (RNA)    Single stranded molecule essential in various
biological roles in coding, decoding, regulation and expression of genes

Ribosome    A minute particle consisting of RNA and associated proteins
found in large numbers in the cytoplasm of living cells

Ritinovir    Antiviral drug for HIV and used with Paxlovid

Rituximab (Rituxan, Truxima)    Monoclonal antibody drug

RNA    Ribonucleic acid, principal role is to act as a messenger
carrying instructions from DNA for controlling the synthesis of proteins

RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq)    Technique using NGS to reveal the presence
and quantity of RNA in a sample at a given moment

Rogue    Out of ordinary, or against the rules (e.g., rogue
antigen-presenting complex)

Rogue B cell    B cells involvement in the development of autoimmunity
through epitope spreading

Rubor    Redness associated with acute inflammation

S

Salicylic acid    Type of phenolic acid

Sanger method    Original method for determining the nucleotide sequence
of DNA replaced by “next generation sequencing” (NGS)

Sarcoma    Cancers that begin in the bones and in connective tissues

Sarilumab (Kevzara)    Monoclonal antibody drug

SARS-CoV-2    Severe acute respiratory syndrome, novel coronavirus

Secukinumab (Cosentyx)    Monoclonal antibody drug

Self    Anything relating to the body (versus nonself)

Self-recognition    To distinguish what is nonself (foreign) from what
is self

Sensitivity    Ability of a test to correctly identify patients with a
disease

Sequences    Kind of genetic information that is carried in a particular
DNA segment

Seroconversion    A change from a seronegative to a seropositive in
blood

Serology    Study or diagnostic examination of blood serum relative to
immune response

Serotype (Ad5)    Human species C adenovirus serotype 5 (Ad5) most
common viral vector used in clinical studies

Serum    See plasma

Signature    Single or combined group of genes in a cell with a uniquely
characteristic pattern of gene expression

Simponi    TNF inhibitor

Siponimod (Mayzent)    Treatment for multiple sclerosis

Skin, tears, mucus secretions, and mucus membranes    Anatomical
features of innate immune system

Small-molecule drugs    Target molecules small enough to enter cells
easily

Social distancing    Maintaining minimum distance between people during
epidemic

Somatic cells    Any cell of the body except sperm and egg cells

Somatic mutations    Genetic alteration acquired by a cell that can be
passed to the progeny of the mutated cell in the course of cell division

Specificity    Ability of a test to correctly identify people without
the disease

Spike protein    A protein (S) which protrudes from the envelope of a
coronavirus, allowing for entry of the virion into a host cell by
binding to an ACE-2 receptor on its surface

Staging    Determination of how advanced the cancer is relative to its
spreading (metastasis)

Stem cell therapy    Use of stem cell transplantation to treat or
prevent a disease or condition

Stem cell transplantation    Stem cell replacement therapy

Stress antigens    Any form of stress producing an immune response

Subgenomic RNA    Messengers for protein expression, or to regulate
their viral life cycle

Sulfasalazine (Azulfidine)    IL-1 and TNF suppressor

Synovectomy    Surgical procedure used to treat synovitis and some other
conditions that affect the synovium (thin membrane that lines the inside
of certain joints called “synovial joints”)

Synthetic promoters    Sequence of DNA that does not exist in nature and
which has been designed to control gene expression of a target gene.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE)    Multisystem, diffuse autoimmune
disease attacking healthy tissue and organ systems in many parts of the
body

T

T-cell lymphocytes    Agranulocyte, WBCs, leukocytes

T-cell transfer therapy    type of immunotherapy that makes your own
immune cells better able to attack cancer (e.g., CAR-T cell therapy)

T-cytotoxic cell (T_(C))    Immune cell that can kill certain cells,
including foreign cells, cancer cells, and cells infected with a virus

T-helper cell (T_(H))    Recognizing foreign antigens and secreting
substances called cytokines that activate T and B cells

T-memory cell (T_(M))    Antigen-specific T cells that remain long-term
after an infection has been eliminated to support anamnestic response

T-regulatory cell (T_(REG))    Specialized subpopulation of T cells that
act to suppress immune response (similar to T_(S) cell)

T-suppressor cell (T_(S))    Immune cell that blocks the actions of some
other types of lymphocytes, to keep the immune system from becoming
over-active

Tacrolimus (Astrograf XL, Prograf, Protopic)    Calcineurin inhibitor to
treat psoriasis

Target code    Fully compiled or assembled program ready to be loaded
into the computer

Tazarotene (Tazorac, Avage)    See retinoids

Telomere    Compacted DNA nucleotides at tips of chromosomes associated
with aging

Teprotumumab (Tepezza)    Monoclonal antibody drug

Teriflunomide (Aubagio)    Treatment of multiple sclerosis

Thioguanine (Tabloid)    For treatment of psoriasis

Thrombocytes    Platelets aid the formation of blood clots

Thymine (Ts)    Nucleic acid base compound of gene

TIDE (for Tumor Immune Dysfunction and Exclusion)    Technique called
“single-cell RNA sequencing” (scRNA-seq)

TNF-α    Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha (TNF alpha), an inflammatory
cytokine to monitor vital signs and emergencies

Tocilizumab (Actemra)    Monoclonal antibody drug

Tofacitinib (Xeljanz)    Only pill of its kind (JAK [Janus kinases]
inhibitor) that treats rheumatoid arthritis

Toll-like receptor proteins (TLRs)    Surface receptors encoded by major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) that allow T cells to distinguish
between self and nonself and even between self and self

Topoisomerase inhibitors    Anti-metabolites that suppress DNA synthesis

Toxin delivery molecules    Cancer treatment

Transcription    Process by which DNA is copied to RNA in protein
synthesis

Transcriptomics    Expression of the genes' proteins (the proteome)

Transfer RNA (tRNA)    Transport amino acids from the cytoplasm of a
cell to a ribosome in protein synthesis process

Translation    RNA is used to produce proteins in protein synthesis

Transmitter substances    Chemicals (cytokines) that produce signals in
the innate and adaptive immune responses

tRNA    Transfer RNA

Tumor    Swelling from edema in inflammation or caused by an abnormal
growth of tissue, whether benign or malignant

Tumor Immune Dysfunction and Exclusion    See TIDE

Tumor necrosis factor    Multifunctional pro-inflammatory cytokine that
plays important roles in diverse cellular events

Tumor suppressor genes    Discourage cell growth, or briefly halt the
process of DNA repair

Tumorigenic antigens    Carcinogens

Type 1 diabetes    Autoimmune disease in which very little or no insulin
is produced by islets of Langerhans in the pancreas (previously known as
juvenile diabetes)

Type I, allergic    Immediate, allergic (or anaphylactic)
hypersensitivity response

Type II, cytotoxic    Hypersensitivity reaction (sometimes referred to
as antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity [ADCC])

Type III, immune-complex    Hypersensitivity reaction mediated by the
formation of antigen-antibody aggregates called “immune complexes”

Type IV, cell-mediated, delayed reaction    Involves the activation of
phagocytes (pathogen specific), natural killer cells (NK),
antigen-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocytes, and the release of various
cytokines in response to an antigen

U

Ulceration    Circumscribed inflammatory often suppurating lesion on the
skin or an internal mucous surface resulting in necrosis of tissue.

Uracil    Base compound of RNA molecule replaced by thymine in DNA
molecule

Urticaria    An outbreak of swollen, pale red bumps or plaques (wheals)
on the skin that appear suddenly—either as a result of the body's
reaction to certain allergens or for unknown reasons; see Hives

Ustekinumab (Stelara)    Monoclonal antibody drug

V

Vaccination    Treatment with a vaccine to produce immunity against
disease; inoculation.

Vaccine    Biological agents that elicit an immune response to a
specific antigen

Vasculitis    Group of disorders that involve inflammation of blood
vessels produced by immune system

Variant    Alteration in the most common DNA nucleotide sequence

Vasodilation    Dilatation of blood vessels

Vaxign-ML    AI tool to predict COVID-19 vaccine candidates

Vedolizumab (Entyvio)    Monoclonal antibody drug

W

White blood cells (WBCs) or leukocytes    Include lymphocytes,
granulocytes, monocytes, and macrophages

Whole-exome sequencing (WES)    Genomic technique for sequencing all of
the protein-coding regions of genes in a genome (known as the exome)

Whole-genome sequencing (WGS)    Comprehensive method for analyzing
entire genome

X

X chromosome inactivation (XCI)    Embryologic transfer from female to
male

Y

Yin and yang    “All things exist as inseparable and contradictory
opposites” as in immunology's self and nonself-proposition

Z

Zoonotic spillover    Transmission from animal to human

Index

Note: ‘Page numbers followed by “f” indicate figures and “t” indicate
tables.’

A

ACE-2. See Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE-2)

Acquired immune system, 229–230

Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), 186

See also Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)

Active immunity

antibody-encoding gene, 16

cellular attack, 15–16

chemical/humoral attack, 17–18 , 17f

first signal, 13–15 , 14f

regulated immune system, 18–20 , 19f

regulated to dysregulated, 20–21

Acute inflammation, 26–33 , 74–80

allergic hypersensitivity responses, 29

cell-mediated, 30–31

clinical considerations, 33–38

cytotoxic hypersensitivity reaction, 30

delayed reaction, 30–31

dysregulation, 27–31

hypersensitivity, 27–31

immediate hypersensitivity responses, 29

immune-complex hypersensitivity reaction, 30

immunopathophysiology, 27–31

signs, 34–35

symptoms, 34–35

treatment approaches, 35–38

Adaptive immune system

acute inflammation, See Acute inflammation

allergic hypersensitivity responses, 29

cell-mediated, 30–31

chronic inflammation, See Chronic inflammation

clinical considerations, 33–38

cytotoxic hypersensitivity reaction, 30

delayed reaction, 30–31

dysregulation, 27–31

hypersensitivity, 27–31

immediate hypersensitivity responses, 29

immune-complex hypersensitivity reaction, 30

immunopathophysiology, 27–31

signs, 34–35

symptoms, 34–35

treatment approaches, 35–38

Adenine (As), 46–47 , 47f–48f , 51 , 53f

base compound, 231

nucleotide, 229–230

Adjuvant chemotherapy, Cancer, 162

Adoptive cell transfer therapy (ACT therapy), 165

CAR-T cell transfer, 165–168

CAAR-T cell transfer, 165

Advancing adaptive immunity, 73–74

Algorithms, 62–63 , 141–145 , 211 , 218

All of Us, 3 , 33–34 , 82 , 151

precision medicine, 57

Allele, 48–51

heredity, 46 , 48 , 51 , 59

Allergic hypersensitivity responses, 29 , 31–33

Allergy, 18 , 29 , 207

type I allergic hypersensitivty response, 73–74

AlphaFold, 211

Google DeepMind, 211

Amino acid, 51–54 , 53f , 211

Anamnestic memory

T memory cells, 140

B memory cells, 193

Anaphylactic shock, 29

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), 120–121

Anti-idiotype, 26 , 164–165

Anti-inflammatory medications,

immunotherapeutics, 118 , 126 , 199–204

Antibody testing, 197

Antibody-encoding gene, 16 , 60 , 102–103

Antigen, 72 , 86

Antigen presenting complex (APC), 11–12 , 12f

dendritic cell, 11 , 12f , 20

immune synapse, 11 , 13–15

Antibody testing, 197

Antinuclear antibody (ANA), 110–111

Antiviral drugs

Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil), 129 , 203–204

Ivermectin, 204

Molnupiravir, 203

Paxlovid, 203

Remdesivir, 203

Apoptosis, 30–31 , 55–56 , 76 , 78 , 99 , 103–104 , 152 , 156

Artificial intelligence (AI)

algorithms, 41–42 , 63 , 215–218

deeplearrning

machine learning, 57 , 138–139 , 139f , 141–145 , 169–175 , 215–218

Asthma, 21–22 , 29 , 80 , 120 , 130 , 193 , 204

Autoantibodies, 21–22 , 110–111 , 115 , 120 , 193

Autoantibody rogue B-cell association, 193

Autoantigen, 34–35 , 95 , 99 , 101 , 137 , 165

Autoimmune disease

CAAR-T cell therapy, 137

CAR-T cell therapy, 137

causes, 97–104

classification of, 105 , 106t–108t

clinical considerations, 109–111

CRISPR-Cas13, 140

CRISPR-Cas9, 137–140 , 139f

Crohn’s disease (CD), 118

diagnosis of, 110–111

environmental factors, 101

epitope spreading, 102–104

etiologies, 98t

female predilection, 95–97

Graves’ disease, 123–124

Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS), 121 , 141–145

immunotherapies, 126–128 , 127t

inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 116–118

lyonization, 96–97

microbiome, 104

multiple sclerosis (MS), 119–120

myasthenia gravis (MG), 124–125

pathogenesis of, 98t

physical examination, 110

prolonged inflammatory process, 98–99

psoriasis, 122–123

research, 141–145

rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 113–115

signs, 109

symptoms, 109

systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 115–116

type 1 diabetes, 120–121 , 141–145

X chromosome inactivation (XCI), 96–97

Autoimmunity, 17–18 , 34–35 , 61 , 73 , 99

Autologous,

hematopoietic stem cell, 134–135

Autologous CAR-T-cell therapy, 137

Autologous transplantation, 134

stem cells, 137

B

B-cell lymphocytes (B 1 , B M ), 14f , 19–20 , 54 , 79–80

Base compounds

base pairs, 47f , 55

nucleotide bases, 46 , 138 , 209–210

Basophils, 7–8 , 15 , 132

Big data analytics, 39 , 63 , 212

Bioinformatics, 210–211

Bone marrow transplant, 134 , 141

stem cell transplantation, 131 , 134–135

Brachytherapy, 162

radiation therapy, 162

Breast cancer (BC)

BRCA1, 155

BRCA2, 155

C

C-reactive protein (CRP), 81 , 86 , 113

CAAR-T cell therapy, 165

Calor, 101–102

Cancer

CAAR-T cell therapy, 165

cancering, 151–152

CAR-T cell therapy, 165–168 , 167f

chemotherapy, 162

circuit, 164–165

clinical presentations, 159–161

CRISPR-Cas9, 168

diagnosis, 159–160

epigenetics, 156

etiologies, 155–158

idiotype-anti-idiotype regulatory, 164–165

incidence, 152–154

infectious agents, 156–157

metastasis, 159

microbiome, 156–157

microRNA, 158

molecularly targeted therapies, 163

monoclonal antibodies, 163–164 , 164f

oncoevolution, 156

oncogene, 156

Oncogenesis, 155–156

Oncology, 168–169

p53, 156

prevalence of, 152–154

radiation therapy, 162

random genetic mistakes, 155–156

research, 169–175

treatment considerations, 161–169

types, 153t , 161

X chromosome, 158

Cancering, 151–152

Hillis, Danial, 151–152

CANTOS, 81

CAR-T cell therapy, 165–168

Carcinogen, 155–156

Carcinogenesis, 155–158

Cardio/cerebrovascular diseases, 81

Cas 13 enzyme, gene editing, 140 , 207

Cas 9 enzyme, gene editing, 131–132 , 136–140

Caseation, 76 , 101

Cell-mediated, 15 , 30–31

Central dogma of molecular biology, 51–54 , 53f , 76

protein synthesis, 46–47 , 51–54

Centromere, 47–48

chromosome, 47–48

Checkpoint inhibitor, 87 , 130 , 163–164 , 168 , 188–189

monoclonal antibodies, 128–129

immunotherapy, 80

Chemotherapy, 162

Chimeric, 137 , 138f , 165 , 167f

Chromosome

DNA, 5–6 , 46–51 , 48f , 77 , 99 , 138–139 , 155–156 , 162 , 187 , 197 ,
207–208

double helix, 48f

Chronic conditions

chronic disease, 84–86 , 90–91 , 130

chronic inflammation, 71–94

comorbidity, 195

XCI, 96–97

Chronic inflammation

adaptive immune system, See Adaptive immune system

advancing adaptive immunity, 73–74

cardio and cerebrovascular diseases, 81

causes (etiologies) of, 72–73

chronic conditions, 85t

chronic inflammatory orthopedic conditions, 83t

clinical diagnosis, 84–87

conditions, 83t

diagnostic strategies, 84–86

disease categories associated with, 80–84

etiologies, 73t

histopathology, 75–77

immune system, neural downregulation of, 87–89

immunotherapies treatment, 86–87

musculoskeletal disease, 82

neurologic and neurodegenerative disease, 82–84

path, 40

pathogenesis, 73t

pathophysiology, 75–77

pharmacodynamics of, 77–80

proinflammatory mediators, 79t

research, 89–91

treatment of, 84–87

Cloning, 136

Clonotypes, 209–210

nucleotides, 6

Cluster, 10 , 116–117 , 158 , 182–183

epidemic, 57 , 71–72 , 182–183 , 185

Combination strategies, 168–169

Comorbidity, 195 , 214

multimorbidity, 210

Computational immunology, 210–211

immunoinformatics, 210–211

Contact tracing, 199

Convalescent plasma (serum), 201

Corticosteroids, 129–130

COVID-19

antibody testing, 197

antigen testing, 196

antiviral drugs, 202

clinical considerations for, 194–210

clinical manifestations, 194–195

contact tracing, 199

convalescent plasma, 201

Coronavirus, 208

CRISPR-Cas13, 207

dexamethasone, 201–202

diagnostic testing, 195–198

epidemiology, 211–215

genome sequencing, 197–198

herd immunity, 209

human vaccines project, 209

hydroxychloroquine, 203–204

immunoinformatics, 210–211

immunotherapeutics, 199–204

incidence, 186–188

Ivermectin, 204

mitigation, 199

molecular genetic test, 196–197

molnupiravir, 203

monoclonal antibodies, 200–201

mRNA vaccines, 206

prevalence of, 186–188

public health, 213–215

R naught (RO/R O ), 209

Remdesivir, 203

research, 215–218

RNA screening, 207

SARS-CoV-2, 71

vaccination (immunization), 208–210

vaccine epitaph, 210

vaccines, 204–208

viral mutations, 187–188

CRISPR-Cas13, Gene editing, 137–140 , 139f

CRISPR-Cas9, Gene editing, 140 , 207

Crohn’s disease (CD), 118

Cyclooxygenase, 31–33 , 126–128

inflammatory cascade, 27 , 77–78

Cyclosporine, 140

Cystic fibrosis, 63–65

Cytogenetics, 62–63

Cytokine, 25–26

lymphokine (AU: The term ‘Lymphokine’ is not found in the chapter text)

Cytokine storm, 188–189

Cytosine (Cs), 46

nucleotide, 209–210

D

Damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), 82

Delta

coronavirus, 197

variant, 187 , 197–198

DeepMind Health, 211

Google, 211

Precision medicine, 56–57 , 109 , 163 , 169–175

Deep learning

algorithms, 233

artificial intelligence (AI), 62–63

Dendritic cell, antigen presenting complex (APC), 11–12 , 12f , 20 ,
79–80

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), 46 , 48f , 55–56

Dexamethasone, corticosteroid, 201–202

Diabetes insipidus, 233

Diabetes mellitus, 86 , 195 , 233

Diabetes type 1, 98t , 120–121 , 141–145

Diabetes type 2, 85t

Diapedesis, Endothelial leukocytic adhesion molecule (ELAM), 75–76

Disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs), 113–115 , 129

DNA

base compounds, 233

editing, 233

nucleotides, 6 , 46 , 48f , 55 , 209–210

sequencing, 233

structure, 48f , 187

Dolor, acute inflammation, 73–74

Double helix, chromosome, 48–51 , 48f

Down syndrome, 63–65

Downregulate, 87–88

Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 58

Dysbiosis, microbiome, 104 , 156–157

Dysregulation, 25–26

E

Edema, acute inflammation, 32f

Embryonic stem cell (ESC), 132 , 135f

Endemic, 182–183

Endocarditis, 115

Endothelial leukocytic adhesion molecule (ELAM)

diapedesis, 75–76

inflammatory cascade, 31–33

Eosinophils, 132

Epidemic, 71–72

Epidemiology, 181 , 211–215

Epigenetics, 62 , 156

Epigenome, 62

Epitope spreading, Rogue B cells, 102–104

Epitopes, 102–103

Escapees X chromosome inactivation, 96 , 234

Eugenics, 136

Exome, 46

Exon, 48–51

Exposome, 234

Expression, gene, 61 , 95–96 , 156

F

Feedback inhibition, 25–26

Female predilection, autoimmune disease, 95–97

Fever, Leukocytic pyrogen, 101–102

Fibroblast, chronic inflammation, 76

First signal, innate immunity, 13–15

Functio laesa, acute inflammation, 82

G

Gene

basic science of, 46–54

big data analytics, 63

chromosome, 47–48 , 47f

DNA structure, 48f

editing, 137–140

expression, 61 , 96–97 , 137 , 156 , 159–160

functions, 46–51

genomics by the numbers, 55–56

karyotype, 48–51 , 49f

modulation, 156–157

molecular biology, central dogma of, 51–54 , 52f–53f

mutation, 56

replacement therapy, 131

research, 63–65

sequencing, 165 , 197–198

Genetic cloning, 46 , 136

Genetic code, 6 , 16 , 46 , 48 , 55 , 156

Genetic engineering or modification, 136

Genetics, heredity, 46 , 101

Genome, sequencing, 197–198

Genotype, 101

Genomics

big data analytics, 63

by numbers, 55–56

Genotype, 71–72 , 101

Genome, 83–84 , 99

Germline genetic modification, 135–136

Google

DeepMind Health, 211

Precision medicine, 57

Granuloma, chronic inflammation, 76

Graves’ disease, 123–124

Guanine (Gs), nucleotide, 138

Guardian of the genome, 55

p53 protein, 156

Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS), 121 , 141–145

H

Haploid strands, 48–51

Helix, 46–51 , 55–56

Hematopoietic stem cell therapy, 134–135

Herd immunity

COVID-19, 209

pandemic, 190–191

Heredity, genetics, 46 , 51–54 , 101

Heuristic, 63

Hillis, Daniel, Cancering, 151–152

Histamine, 29 , 31–33

Homeostasis, 35 , 61 , 87–88 , 104

Human Genome Project, 3 , 56

Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS), 185–186

Human Vaccines Project, 209

Humoral, 72 , 78

Hybridoma technology, 128–129

Hydrocortisone, 122–123

Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil), 129 , 203–204

Hygiene hypothesis, 60 , 95–96

Hypersensitivity response, 29

Hypertrophy, 159

I

Idiotype Idiotype network theory (INT), 90–91 , 165

Idiotype-anti-idiotype regulatory circuit (Loop), 164–165

Immediate hypersensitivity responses, 29 , 73–74

Immune synapse

adaptive immune system, See Adaptive immune system

antigen presenting complex (APC), 11–12 , 12f

Immune-complex hypersensitivity, 30

Immunization, 86 , 92 , 208–210

Immunology, 74 , 90–91 , 111–113 , 151–180

immuno-oncology, 168–169

immunocompromised, 110 , 154

immunodeficiency, 185

immunogenetics, 46 , 54 , 87

immunogenomics, 16 , 40 , 54–55

immunoinformatics, 210–211

immunopharmacology, 129

immunotherapeutics, 126–128 , 127t

Immunoinformatics, 210–211

Immunome, 76

Immunomodulators, 76 , 209

Immunopathophysiology, 27–31

Immunosenescence, 82

Immunosuppression, 110

Immune system

active immunity, 9–21

adaptive immunity, 25–26

antibody-encoding gene, 16

antigen presenting complex (APC), 11–12 , 12f

cellular attack, 15–16

chemical/humoral attack, 17–18 , 17f

definition, 87–89

development of, 87–89

first signal, 13–15 , 14f

gross anatomy, 6–7 , 7f

innate immunity, 9–21

lyonization, 5–6

microanatomy, 7–9 , 8f

molecular biology, 7–9 , 8f

regulated immune system, 18–20 , 19f

regulated to dysregulated, 20–21

research, 21–22

TLR sentry, 12–13

X chromosome inactivation (XCI), 5–6

Immunotherapies

antiviral drugs, 202

combination strategies, 168–169

convalescent plasma, 201

dexamethasone, 201–202

hydroxychloroquine, 203–204

Immunotherapies, 126–128

ivermectin, 204

molnupiravir, 203

monoclonal antibodies, 128–129

Remdesivir, 203

In silico

computational immunology, 210–211

immunoinformatics, 210–211

InDelphi, 138–139 , 237–238

Induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC), 132

stem cell transplantation, 131 , 134

Induration, 75–76 , 237–238

chronic inflammation, 71–94

Infectious agents, 156–157

Infiltration, 77

Inflammaging, 82

Inflammation (…itis)

acute inflammation, See Acute inflammation

chronic inflammation, See Chronic inflammation

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 61 , 116–118

Inflammatory cascade, 78

Inflammatory response, 78

Innate (aka natural) immune response, 72

Insulin, 120

Interferon, 129–130

Interleukins, 204

Isoantigens, Histocompatibility (HLA) gene, 141

Itis, inflammation, 74

Ivermectin, 204

K

Kahler disease, multiple myeloma, 238

Karyotype, chromosomes, 48–51 , 49f , 101 , 238

Kynurenine pathway, 169–175 , 238

L

Leukemia, 161 , 164f , 238

Leukocyte, White blood cell (WBC), 79–80 , 132 , 238

Leukocytic pyrogen, 101–102

calor, 101–102

fever, 109

Ligand

PD 1 and 2, 169

Lipoxygenase, inflammatory cascade, 27

Lymphatic system, 161

Lymphocytes (T H T S T C T M and B B M), 138f

Lymphoma, 156–157

Lyonization (XCI), 58–59 , 96–97

chromosome, 158

M

Machine learning

algorithm, 138–139

artificial intelligence (AI), 141–145

Macrophage, 11 , 82–83

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC), 11–12 , 102–103

MHC Class 1 and 2 genes, 11

Masking effect

corticosteroids, 36

dexamethasone, 201–202

Melanoma, 130 , 152–153 , 169

Mendelian disorders

heredity, 48 , 51

genetics, 111–113

Messenger RNA (mRNA)

central dogma of molecular biology, 51–54

transcription, 189–190

Metastasis, 159

Metastatic cancer, 159

Microanatomy, 7–9

Microbiome, probiotics, 60

Microbiota, 104 , 157

Microchimerism, 5

MicroRNA, X chromosome, 158 , 239–240

Mitigation

COVID-19, 199

pandemic, 199

Molecular biology, 7–9 , 135–140

Molecular genetic test, 196–197

Molecularly targeted therapies, 163

Molnupiravir, 203

Paxlovid, 203 , 241–243

Monoclonal antibodies

biologics, 129–131

checkpoint inhibitors, 130

Monocytes, 10 , 30 , 76

mRNA

central dogma of molecular biology, 51–54

mRNA screening, 140

mRNA vaccines, 206

transcription, 51

Multimorbidity, comorbidity, 86 , 195

Multiple myeloma, 161

Multiple sclerosis (MS), 119–120

Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C), 105

cytokine storm, 188–189

Musculoskeletal disease, 82

Mutation, 187–188

cancer, 152 , 155–156

DNA, 156–157

Myasthenia gravis (MG), 124–125

Myocarditis, 77 , 115 , 194–195

N

National Cancer Institute, 152

Precision Medicine Initiaitive, 163

National Institute of Health (NIH), 57 , 74

Natural killer [NK] cells, 7–8 , 19f , 30 , 60

Naught point

COVID-19, 240

pandemic, 240

Necrosis, chronic inflammation, 76

Neoadjuvant chemotherapy, cancer, 162

Neoplasm, neoplastic, 71 , 155–156

Neuroendocrine tumors, 161

Neurologic/neurodegenerative disease, 82–84

Neutralizing antibodies, 197

Neutrophils, 132

Next-generation sequencing (NGS), Sanger method, 55

Non-specific therapies, 126

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), 31–33

Normal flora, 13 , 60

Nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB), 88

Nucleic acids, 56

Nucleotide bases, 138

O

Omicron

coronavirus, 187–188

variant, 187–188

Omics technologies, 141–145

Oncoevolution, 156

Oncogene, 156

Oncogenesis, 155–156

Oncology, 168–169

Opsinization, adaptive immune system, 241

Organ morphogenesis, 134

Osteoarthritis, 133–134

Outbreak, epidemic, 182–183

Overshoot, herd immunity, 209

P

p53, Guardian of the genome, 156

PALB2, 155

Pandemic

epidemic, 198

outbreak, 183

cluster, 183

Passive immunity, 4

Pathogen, 157

Pathogenesis, 188–193

Pathology, 105

Pathophysiology, 29 , 74–77

Paxlovid, 203

PCR, See Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)

PD 1 and 2, ligand, 61 , 130 , 157 , 169

Perivasculitis, 76 , 105 , 188–189

Personalized medicine

precision medicine, 57

All of Us, 82 , 158

Phagocytize, 206

Phagocytosis, 15 , 35 , 79–80

Pharmacodynamics, 31–33 , 77–80 , 111

Pharmacoeconomics, 241–243

Pharmacogenetics, 241–243

Pharmacogenomics, 241–243

Pharmacovigilance, 241–243

Phenotype, chromosomes, 99 , 109

Phenotype trigger, 63 , 101 , 109

Phylogeny, 16 , 158 , 193

Plaquenil, hydroxychloroquine, 236

Plasma cells, 16 , 19f , 77 , 102–103 , 161 , 241–243

Platelets, 79–80 , 132

Pluripotent stem cells, stem cell transplantation, 241–243

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 191

Polymorphonuclear (PMN), 18–19

Precision (personalized) medicine, National Institute of Health, 74

Precision health

All of Us, 186–188 , 229–230

Genetics, 99 , 152

Prevention, 57

Prednisone, 113–115

Prevalence, 84–85 , 152–154 , 186–188

Pro-inflammatory cytokine, 31

Probiotics, microbiome, 60 , 104

Progenitor, 76 , 132–133

Programmed death (PD) protein, 10–11 , 168

PD-L1, 130 , 169

Proinflammatory mediators, 4 , 78 , 79t , 101–102 , 126

adaptive immune system, 95–96 , 209–210

Prostaglandins, 88

inflammatory cascade, 27 , 31–33 , 74 , 78 , 99

Protease, 203

Protein synthesis, 51–52

Proteolysis, 52

Proteome, 215–218

Proteomics, 77

Psoriasis, 106t–108t , 122–123

Public health, 184–185 , 187–188 , 213–215

Pus, 35

R

Radiation therapy, cancer, 162

Radioactive iodine (I-131), 162

Recombinant, vaccines, 202

Regenerative medicine, stem cell transplantation, 132–135

Regulated immune system, 18–20 , 26

Remdesivir, 203

antiviral, 202

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 113–115

Ribonucleic acid (RNA)

messengerRNA (mRNA), 51–54 , 52f , 205f , 206–207

microRNA (miRNA), 61 , 158

transferRNA (tRNA), 51–54

Ribosome, 51

RNA

RNA Ribonucleic acid, 46–47

RNA screening, 207

RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), 137

RNA structure, 48f

R-Naught (R O or RO), 209

Rogue B cell, 102–105 , 193

epitope spreading, 101–105

Rubor, acute inflammation, 35–36 , 73–74

S

Sanger method, Next gen sequencing, 55

Sarcoma, 161

SARS-CoV-2, COVID-19, 181 , 188–193

genetic and genomic considerations, 192–193

life cycle, 189–190 , 189f

mechanisms, 188–189

natural pathogenesis, 191–192

novel coronavirus, 181

pathogenesis, 188–193

theories, 190–191

Sequences, 47f , 55–56 , 137 , 158 , 184

Seroconversion, 191

Serology, 191

Serotype (Ad5), 206 , 208

Serum, Plasma, 201

Small-molecule drugs, 163

Social distancing, 212–213

COVID-19, 184–185

Somatic cells, 8–9

Somatic mutations, 63–65

Spike protein, 187 , 189f , 192 , 204

novel coronavirus, 181 , 184–185 , 191–192 , 206

Staging, cancer, 161

Stem cell therapy, regenerative medicine, 132–135

Stem cell transplantation, 131 , 134

Stress antigens, 99

Subgenomic RNA, SARS-CoV-2, 189f

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE), 105 , 115–116

T

T-cell lymphocytes (T H T S T C T M ), 132

T-cell transfer therapy, 165

CAR-T therapy, 165–168

Telomere, chromosome, 245–246

Thrombocytes, 245–246

Thymine (Ts)

nucleotide, 240

base compound, 231

TIDE. See Tumor Immune Dysfunction and Exclusion (TIDE)

TLR sentry, 12–13

Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha (TNF-α), 245–246

Toll-like receptors (TLRs), 21–22

sentry of the immune system, 21–22

Topoisomerase inhibitors, 103–104

Transcription, Central dogma of molecular biology, 245–246

Transcriptomics, 52

Transfer RNA (tRNA), 51

Translation, Central dogma of molecular biology, 245–246

Transplant therapies, 134 , 140–141

tRNA Transfer RNA, 51

Tumor

cancer, 85t

acute inflammation, 32f

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF), 78 , 81 , 129–130

Type 1 diabetes, 120–121

Type 2 diabetes, 85t

U

Ulceration, 99

Uracil, 46–47

base compound, 246

Urticaria, 246

V

Vaccination, 200–201

Vaccination (immunization), 208–210

Vaccine, 204–208

CRISPR-Cas13, 207

mRNA vaccines, 204–208

recombinant, 206

RNA screening, 207

Vaccine epitaph, 210

Variants

Delta, 187

mutation, DNA, 187

Omicron, 187–188

Vasculitis, 246

Vasodilation, inflammation, 246

Viral mutations, 187–188

W

White blood cell (WBC), leukocyte, 8f , 10 , 132 , 201

Whole-exome sequencing (WES), 55 , 246

Whole-genome sequencing (WGS), 246

X

X chromosome, miRNA, 225

X chromosome inactivation (XCI), 5–6 , 96–97 , 158

Z

Zoonotic spillover, 191–192 , 247

[1] ¹  Merriam-Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 2021.
