= Contents =
        - [[#16 cron commands]]
        - [[#16 basic cron command in Linux with Examples]]
                - [[#1. How to schedule a cronjob for a particular time daily]]
                - [[#2. How to list the crontab entry?]]
                - [[#3. How to modify the cronjob for a different user?]]
                - [[#How to list different user crontab entries?]]
                - [[#How to schedule a cronjob for every single minute?]]
                - [[#How to schedule a cronjob twice a day?]]
                - [[#How to schedule a cronjob every 10 minutes?]]
                - [[#How to schedule a cronjob for selective days?]]
                - [[#How to schedule a cronjob for selective months?]]
                - [[#How to use a special string in cron?]]
                - [[#How to schedule a cronjob using @yearly special string?]]
                - [[#How to schedule a cronjob using @monthly special string?]]
                - [[#How to schedule a cronjob using @daily special string?]]
                - [[#How to schedule a cronjob using @hourly special string?]]
                - [[#How to execute a script/command after every reboot using @reboot special string?]]

= 16 cron commands =


= 16 basic cron command in Linux with Examples =

== How to schedule a cronjob for a particular time daily ==

	crontab -e

	30 01 s s s   /usr/scripts/rsync_svnvmback.sh >/dev/null 2>&1

== How to list the crontab entry? ==

    crontab -l 30 01 s  s s /usr/scripts/rsync_svnvmback.sh >/dev/null 2>&1 

== How to modify the cronjob for a different user? ==

    crontab -u linuxteck -e 30 01 s  s  /usr/scripts/rsync_svnvmback.sh 

== How to list different user crontab entries? ==

    crontab -u linuxteck -l 30 01 s  s  s  /usr/scripts/rsync_svnvmback.sh 

== How to schedule a cronjob for every single minute? ==

    crontab -e s  s  s  s  s  /usr/scripts/rsync_svnvmback.sh 

== How to schedule a cronjob twice a day? == 

	00  06,20  s  s  s  /usr/scripts/mysqldump.sh >/dev/null 2>&1


== How to schedule a cronjob every 10 minutes? ==

	(The below entry can execute the command/script every 10 minutes consecutively)

	s/10 s  s  s  s  /usr/scripts/rsync_svnvmback.sh

== How to schedule a cronjob for selective days? == 
	0 23  s  s  fri,sun  /usr/scripts/rsync_svnvmback.sh

== How to schedule a cronjob for selective months? == 
	0 23 s  jan,jul  s /usr/scripts/rsync_svnvmback.sh


== How to use a special string in cron? == 


	Keyword             Equivalent              Meaning
	@yearly                    0 0 1 1 s       --> Execute once in a year
	@monthly                0 0 1 s  s       --> Execute once in a month
	@daily                      0 0 s  s  s       --> Execute once in a day
	@hourly                   0 s  s  s  s      --> Execute once in a hour
	@reboot                   --                     --> Execute once at
	startup

== How to schedule a cronjob using @yearly special string? == 

	(The @yearly short code is equivalent to '0 0 1 1  s' )
	
	@yearly  /usr/scripts/yearly_archival.sh

== How to schedule a cronjob using @monthly special string? == 

	(The @monthly short code is equivalent to '0 0 1 s  s' )

	@monthly  /usr/scripts/monthly-backup.sh

== How to schedule a cronjob using @daily special string? == 

	(The @daily short code is equivalent to '0 0 s s s' )

	@daily  /usr/scripts/daily-temp.sh

== How to schedule a cronjob using @hourly special string? == 

	(The @hourly short code is equivalent to '0 s s s s' )

	@hourly  /usr/scripts/hourly_rsync_svnvmback.sh

== How to execute a script/command after every reboot using @reboot special string? ==

	(The @reboot short code can be used to execute a set of commands/scripts after every restart of the server. For eg: After the reboot, we can execute a command /script to check the status of services like DNS, Apache status, etc.)

	@reboot /usr/scripts/bootup_service_status.sh

	Note: The above crontab script will be executed after every reboot. Here I have added the commands in the script to check the status of 'httpd, named, dhcpd' etc so that it will display the list of all the service status.

