==zulucrypt-cli encrypt partition==



interface (GUI). You can also build the program yourself. If you only need the
command-line interface (CLI), then you can simply leave the GUI out.

Rising Star

The software has become more widely distributed since it became a part of the
Canonical archive in Ubuntu 15.10. Since the release of version 18, it also
comes with Linux Mint (Listing 1). Meantime, zuluCrypt has also found a place
in the package sources for Debian, Fedora, openSUSE, Gentoo, and Arch User
Repository (AUR). On their website, the developers make all of the most
recently published packages (currently version 5.0) for Debian and Ubuntu
available for downloading (see the Test box).

Listing 1

=== Automatic Installation ===

$ sudo apt install zulucrypt-gui zulucryw3m: Can't load dump.
pt-cli tcplay cryptsetup

==== Test ====

After consulting with the developers, the test refers to the advanced version
of the future version that will be coming out from the project's Git branch.
The advanced version was built with the openSUSE Build Service (OBS) [6]. It
corrects some of the errors in the translation and documentation. Ubuntu users
should definitely make use of this because the old 4.7.7 version is still
installed from the Ubuntu 16.04's package manager. The developer promised that
a new and stable version would be available around this article's publication
date.

To set up the prerequisites, you should install the packages cryptsetup and
tcplay . These packages are not automatically part of the zuluCrypt
installation. Even so, the software will not function properly without them. If
you are not using a Qt environment like KDE or LXQt, then the package
administration will pull in libqtcore4 and libqt4-network . Listing 2 shows
manual installation on a Debian based distribution. In this example, it is
"Xenial." If you are on a 32-bit system, you should go to the second line and
replace amd64 with i386 .

Listing 2

=== Manual Installation ===

$ tar xf zuluCrypt-5.0.0-ubuntu-16.04-Xenial_Xerus.tar.xz
$ cd zuluCrypt-5.0.0-ubuntu-16.04-Xenial_Xerus/amd64
$ sudo dpkg -i *.deb
$ sudo apt install -f
$ sudo apt install tcplay cryptsetup

