<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><feed xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2005/Atom" xmlns:media="http://search.yahoo.com/mrss/"><category term=" reddit.com" label="r/ reddit.com"/><updated>2023-08-27T00:05:48+00:00</updated><id>/message/inbox/.rss?feed=e9b25c07ed6a6a79c7839a4f343825b69838aabd&amp;user=bpbatan</id><link rel="self" href="https://www.reddit.com/message/inbox/.rss?feed=e9b25c07ed6a6a79c7839a4f343825b69838aabd&amp;user=bpbatan" type="application/atom+xml" /><link rel="alternate" href="https://www.reddit.com/message/inbox/?feed=e9b25c07ed6a6a79c7839a4f343825b69838aabd&amp;user=bpbatan" type="text/html" /><title>messages: inbox</title><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 2 months ago: Welcome to r/learnprogramming! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Welcome to &lt;a href=&quot;/r/learnprogramming&quot;&gt;/r/learnprogramming&lt;/a&gt;!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Before posting or commenting, please be sure to:&lt;/p&gt; &lt;ol&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;p&gt;Read our &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/comments/61oly8/new_read_me_first/&quot;&gt;New? READ ME FIRST!&lt;/a&gt; stickied post.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;p&gt;Read our &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/about/rules&quot;&gt;subreddit rules&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;p&gt;Make sure your question or post is &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/index#wiki_allowed_topics&quot;&gt;on-topic&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;/ol&gt; &lt;p&gt;In addition, if you&amp;#39;re here to:&lt;/p&gt; &lt;ol&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;Ask a question&lt;/strong&gt;, start by checking to see if your question is &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/faq&quot;&gt;already answered in the FAQ&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;For example, if you want to learn where to start learning how to program, see &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/faq#wiki_getting_started&quot;&gt;FAQ - Getting started&lt;/a&gt; and &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/faq#wiki_where_do_i_find_good_learning_resources.3F&quot;&gt;FAQ - Where do I find good learning resources?&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;If you&amp;#39;re unable to view the wiki, try visiting the page from a desktop browser, enabling desktop mode on your phone&amp;#39;s web browser, or changing the start of the url to begin with &lt;code&gt;old.reddit.com&lt;/code&gt; instead of &lt;code&gt;reddit.com&lt;/code&gt;. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Also be sure to read our guidelines on &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/index#wiki_asking_questions&quot;&gt;how to ask a question&lt;/a&gt; to learn more about how to write a strong technical question and increase your chances of getting an answer.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;Get feedback on some code you&amp;#39;ve written&lt;/strong&gt;, start by reading our &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/index#wiki_sharing_a_project&quot;&gt;guidelines on sharing a project&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;Help answer questions&lt;/strong&gt;, start by reading our &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/index#wiki_offering_help&quot;&gt;guidelines on offering help&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;Share an educational resource you&amp;#39;ve made&lt;/strong&gt;, start by first participating in our community by answering some questions or giving feedback in our weekly &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/search?q=%22What+have+you+been+working+on+recently%3F%22&amp;amp;sort=new&amp;amp;restrict_sr=on&quot;&gt;&amp;quot;What have you been working on?&amp;quot; threads&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Once you&amp;#39;ve spent some time directly participating, read our &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/index#wiki_self-promotion&quot;&gt;policies on self-promotion&lt;/a&gt; to learn about our expectations regarding educational resources.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;/ol&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/learnprogramming&quot;&gt;r/learnprogramming&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/learnprogramming&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1vmy0un&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1vmy0un</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1vmy0un"/><updated>2023-06-08T11:35:27+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 2 months ago: Welcome to r/learnprogramming!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 2 months ago: Welcome to r/learnprogramming!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/linuxmasterrace! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Hello and welcome to &lt;a href=&quot;/r/linuxmasterrace&quot;&gt;/r/linuxmasterrace&lt;/a&gt;, a subreddit for fun discussion of Linux and FOSS!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;We have an IRC channel located here: &lt;a href=&quot;https://kiwiirc.com/nextclient/irc.snoonet.org/#linuxmasterrace&quot;&gt;https://kiwiirc.com/nextclient/irc.snoonet.org/#linuxmasterrace&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Alternatively with an IRC client: &lt;code&gt;irc.snoonet.org&lt;/code&gt; (port 6667/6697 for SSL) &lt;code&gt;#linuxmasterrace&lt;/code&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;If you have any questions, don&amp;#39;t hesitate to ask. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Cheers, &lt;a href=&quot;/r/linuxmasterrace&quot;&gt;/r/linuxmasterrace&lt;/a&gt; team.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/linuxmasterrace&quot;&gt;r/linuxmasterrace&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/linuxmasterrace&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1soaiut&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1soaiut</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1soaiut"/><updated>2023-04-12T04:16:36+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/linuxmasterrace!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/linuxmasterrace!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/termux! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Thank you for joining &lt;a href=&quot;/r/termux&quot;&gt;/r/termux&lt;/a&gt;!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;We are a technical community of enthusiasts who uses Termux, a terminal emulator and Linux user space for Android OS. Feel free here to share interesting use cases, scripts, configuration or help others to troubleshoot issues.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Termux developers are moderators there. Be respectful and follow the community rules. Please don&amp;#39;t use this subreddit for reporting bugs as they wouldn&amp;#39;t be tracked.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/termux&quot;&gt;r/termux&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/termux&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1soadnh&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1soadnh</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1soadnh"/><updated>2023-04-12T04:16:01+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/termux!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/termux!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/linuxmemes! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;You&amp;#39;ve subscribed to the worst subreddit on reddit. The penguins are clapping. They have waited their whole lives for your arrival. Set your sanity aside for it&amp;#39;s the wrong tool for the job.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/linuxmemes&quot;&gt;r/linuxmemes&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/linuxmemes&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1soad7i&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1soad7i</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1soad7i"/><updated>2023-04-12T04:15:58+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/linuxmemes!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/linuxmemes!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 7 months ago: Welcome to r/CLI! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Welome to CLI Community, be free to create a post about some info or publish some repost fro another community who can help others to learn and find something nice about CLI :)&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/CLI&quot;&gt;r/CLI&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/CLI&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1p3oau6&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1p3oau6</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1p3oau6"/><updated>2023-01-15T17:05:50+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 7 months ago: Welcome to r/CLI!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 7 months ago: Welcome to r/CLI!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 7 months ago: Welcome to r/tmux! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Welcome to &lt;a href=&quot;/r/tmux&quot;&gt;r/tmux&lt;/a&gt;!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/tmux&quot;&gt;r/tmux&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/tmux&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1p1e3uv&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1p1e3uv</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1p1e3uv"/><updated>2023-01-13T16:00:38+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 7 months ago: Welcome to r/tmux!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 7 months ago: Welcome to r/tmux!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/reddit</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/reddit</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from reddit sent 8 months ago: Your 2022 Reddit Recap is here! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;This year’s Recap is bananas! See your top communities, how much you’ve scrolled (in appropriate measurements), your super secret Reddit ability, and much more.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/RedditRecap2022&quot;&gt;Check out your 2022 Reddit Recap now!&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1nu0dgn&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1nu0dgn</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1nu0dgn"/><updated>2022-12-12T08:10:57+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from reddit sent 8 months ago: Your 2022 Reddit Recap is here!</summary><title>from reddit sent 8 months ago: Your 2022 Reddit Recap is here!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/NewsletterAU</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/NewsletterAU</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from NewsletterAU sent 10 months ago: The Fair Dinkum Digest - October Edition &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Greetings Aussies,&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Can you believe we’re already in the last three months of 2022? I saw some Christmas decorations up at Woolies the other day and couldn’t believe it was already that time of year. Have any of you started Christmas shopping yet? Or is it far too early to even consider it? At any rate, it’s been a busy month so let’s get to it!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;Community Spotlight&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;http://www.reddit.com/r/aussiecasual&quot;&gt;&lt;strong&gt;r/AussieCasual&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;/r/AussieCasual&quot;&gt;r/AussieCasual&lt;/a&gt; recently saw some massive growth and is now pushing 10,000 subscribers! We even had a visit from a non-Australian who was &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/AussieCasual/comments/xkq5s4/as_a_non_australian_i_must_ask_what_the_hell_is/&quot;&gt;completely baffled by The Magic Pudding movie&lt;/a&gt;. Let’s see what they think once they finish watching The Ferals and Round the Twist.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;http://www.reddit.com/r/melbourne&quot;&gt;&lt;strong&gt;r/melbourne&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;If you’re looking for a sub with discussions raging from the serious to the hilarious, you can never go wrong with &lt;a href=&quot;/r/Melbourne&quot;&gt;r/Melbourne&lt;/a&gt;. In particular, this month we bid farewell to the Train Station Elimination Game (congratulations Footscray Station) and say cheers to this &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/melbourne/comments/x148sr/i_built_a_tool_to_find_your_local_mp_and_contact/&quot;&gt;Redditor who built a tool to find your local MP and contact them about saving Medicare Bulk Billing in seconds&lt;/a&gt;. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;http://www.reddit.com/r/Ausfinance&quot;&gt;&lt;strong&gt;r/AusFinance&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;If you, like everyone else in the country, has been hit by the constant interest rate rises, then head on over to &lt;a href=&quot;/r/AusFinance&quot;&gt;r/AusFinance&lt;/a&gt; for discussions on Australian personal finance, banking, investments, superannuation, insurance, and tax. Talk about everything from how &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/AusFinance/comments/x7usti/tipping_in_restaurants/&quot;&gt;tipping culture is infiltrating Australia&lt;/a&gt; to what you can do about the &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/AusFinance/comments/xnehts/optus_data_breach_what_you_can_do/&quot;&gt;Optus data breach&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;em&gt;Want to see your community featured in next month’s Snoosletter? &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/compose?to=%2Fr%2Faussiemods&amp;amp;subject=Snoosletter+Feature+Request&quot;&gt;Send us a message here for consideration&lt;/a&gt;. If you don’t get highlighted one month, feel free to write in again, especially if you’re doing something special within your community that you want to share. Community events, milestones, good deeds and moderation success stories are especially welcome!&lt;/em&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;Become a mod!&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Did you know that we recently launched our Mod Education program on a new platform? &lt;a href=&quot;https://modeducation.reddithelp.com&quot;&gt;Reddit’s Mod Education site&lt;/a&gt; is an opt-in, self-led training platform that consists of courses for moderators of all experience levels who are interested in an out-of-the-box learning solution for mod tools, best practices, and more. Try it out for yourself - or, if you’re bringing in mod recruits, consider having them try it in conjunction with your own community-specific training resources. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;You can use the &lt;a href=&quot;https://modeducation.reddithelp.com/reddit-mod-education-feedback&quot;&gt;feedback link&lt;/a&gt; in the site’s header navigation bar to let us know what you like, what you don’t like, and to share suggestions for future courses. We’ll be sure to share more here and in &lt;a href=&quot;/r/ModCertification&quot;&gt;r/ModCertification&lt;/a&gt; when new courses have landed!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;http://www.reddit.com/r/RealityTVAustralia&quot;&gt;&lt;strong&gt;r/RealityTVAustralia&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Since starting this sub a month ago, our team has grown exponentially and will soon pass 1k viewers! So, we’re looking for new mods to join us. To audition, &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/compose/?to=/r/RealityTVAustralia&quot;&gt;send us a modmail&lt;/a&gt; and let us know:&lt;/p&gt; &lt;ul&gt; &lt;li&gt;If you have any moderation experience (not required)&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;How you would improve the sub&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;What your favourite reality show is&lt;/li&gt; &lt;/ul&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;http://www.reddit.com/r/GardeningAustralia&quot;&gt;&lt;strong&gt;r/GardeningAustralia&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;This 40,000-member subreddit has recently been flagged for being unmoderated and is now looking for mods! If you’re interested in becoming the new mod team for &lt;a href=&quot;/r/GardeningAustralia&quot;&gt;r/GardeningAustralia&lt;/a&gt;, &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/compose?to=/r/GardeningAustralia&quot;&gt;please send us a modmail&lt;/a&gt; and let us know your favourite plant!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;http://www.reddit.com/r/WomenOfAus&quot;&gt;&lt;strong&gt;r/WomenOfAus&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Aimed at providing a dedicated space for Australian women, this subreddit is looking for amazing mods to join the team and help us launch! If you’re interested in helping us build a community, &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/compose/?to=/r/WomenOfAus&quot;&gt;please shoot us a modmail&lt;/a&gt; and tell us why you want to be a mod. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;A quick reminder:&lt;/strong&gt; &lt;em&gt;If you’d prefer not to get these Snoosletters in your inbox, just hit the “&lt;a href=&quot;https://i.redd.it/k2vk3dmx61z61.gif&quot;&gt;Block User&lt;/a&gt;” button under this message on desktop.&lt;/em&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1i3lq0s&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1i3lq0s</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1i3lq0s"/><updated>2022-10-04T03:29:04+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from NewsletterAU sent 10 months ago: The Fair Dinkum Digest - October Edition</summary><title>from NewsletterAU sent 10 months ago: The Fair Dinkum Digest - October Edition</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 11 months ago: Welcome to r/terminal_porn! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Welcome to &lt;a href=&quot;/r/terminal_porn&quot;&gt;r/terminal_porn&lt;/a&gt;! Read the rules, and help grow this subreddit by posting.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/terminal_porn&quot;&gt;r/terminal_porn&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/terminal_porn&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1hr163w&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1hr163w</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1hr163w"/><updated>2022-09-22T15:41:42+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 11 months ago: Welcome to r/terminal_porn!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 11 months ago: Welcome to r/terminal_porn!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/NewsletterAU</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/NewsletterAU</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from NewsletterAU sent 11 months ago: The Fair Dinkum Digest - September Edition &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Greetings Aussie users,&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Welcome to spring and your very first Monthly User Snoosletter - Down Under edition! While there have been developments all around the world, this is the place to dive into all things Australian news. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;What’s a fact about your state that sounds made up but is real?&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Redditors in our city subs have been having a great time sharing facts about their cities that sound made up but are real. For example, did you know that &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/melbourne/comments/wxt2vo/what_is_a_fact_about_melbourne_that_sounds_made/&quot;&gt;Melbourne&lt;/a&gt; has the highest fox population out of any CBD in the world? Or that a Maccas in &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/Adelaide/comments/wy45ar/whats_a_fact_about_adelaide_that_sounds_fake_but/&quot;&gt;Adelaide&lt;/a&gt; was the named the “The world’s dirtiest McDonald’s” in 2009? I also learned that the &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/brisbane/comments/wy0ywr/what_is_a_fact_about_brisbane_that_sounds_made_up/&quot;&gt;Brisbane&lt;/a&gt; River is five times older than the Nile!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;Community Spotlight&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;http://www.reddit.com/r/aussiemakeuptrade&quot;&gt;&lt;strong&gt;r/AussieMakeupTrade&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Calling all beauty gurus! &lt;a href=&quot;/r/AussieMakeupTrade&quot;&gt;r/AussieMakeupTrade&lt;/a&gt; is the subreddit to buy, swap and exchange your unwanted, unloved or forgotten beauty products within Australia. Not sure where to start? Check out their ISO (In Search Of) &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/AussieMakeupTrade/comments/wqce5w/isorequest_megathread_august_2022/&quot;&gt;monthly megathread&lt;/a&gt; to see what’s on offer! &lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;http://www.reddit.com/r/brisbane&quot;&gt;&lt;strong&gt;r/brisbane&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Congratulations to &lt;a href=&quot;/r/brisbane&quot;&gt;r/brisbane&lt;/a&gt; who have recently hit 200,000 subscribers! In the humblest of brags, this amazing community now has &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/brisbane/comments/wyu0vv/fun_fact_this_community_has_3_times_more_daily/&quot;&gt;3X more daily pageviews than The Brisbane Times&lt;/a&gt;. Can we also take a moment to appreciate this amazing &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/brisbane/comments/ww6k55/my_nephews_book_week_effort/&quot;&gt;Book Week costume&lt;/a&gt;? &lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;http://www.reddit.com/r/afl&quot;&gt;&lt;strong&gt;r/afl&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;With AFL Finals kicking off this weekend (time to pony up the &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/AFL/comments/x0eeb9/2022_finals_bandwagons_are_now_available/&quot;&gt;Bandwagons&lt;/a&gt; and a spectacular launch into season 7 of AFLW, there’s more footy than ever before, and the subreddit has crowned a new &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/AFL/comments/wzqvv8/2022_lol_of_the_year_announcement/&quot;&gt;LOL of the Year&lt;/a&gt;!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;Become a mod!&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Are you interested in becoming a moderator? Then check out &lt;a href=&quot;/r/ModCertification101&quot;&gt;r/ModCertification101&lt;/a&gt;. This is a beta program intended for new community creators to learn about the basics of moderation - &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/ModCertification101/comments/p39ig5/setting_up_the_basics_of_your_new_community/&quot;&gt;simply click here&lt;/a&gt; to get started.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;If you have any questions about becoming a moderator or starting your own community, we also encourage you to join &lt;a href=&quot;/r/AussieMods&quot;&gt;r/AussieMods&lt;/a&gt; where you can connect and exchange tips, ideas and advice with other moderators! Alternatively, if you have any ideas about what you’d like to see, please reach out to us through the &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/compose?to=%2Fr%2Faussiemods&amp;amp;subject=Snoosletter+Mod+Question&quot;&gt;r/AussieMods modmail&lt;/a&gt;. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;Catch you later!&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Ps. If you don’t want to receive this newsletter, simply BLOCK this account.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1hbb4u7&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1hbb4u7</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1hbb4u7"/><updated>2022-09-08T08:15:55+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from NewsletterAU sent 11 months ago: The Fair Dinkum Digest - September Edition</summary><title>from NewsletterAU sent 11 months ago: The Fair Dinkum Digest - September Edition</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 1 year ago: Welcome to r/EarthPorn! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Welcome to EarthPorn. This subreddit is dedicated to Landscape Photography. Please read all the rules in the sidebar and wiki before you post. If you are new to reddit, please participate via comment for a while and learn how the subreddit works before you post.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/EarthPorn&quot;&gt;r/EarthPorn&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/EarthPorn&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1edumnd&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1edumnd</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1edumnd"/><updated>2022-06-05T11:55:30+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 1 year ago: Welcome to r/EarthPorn!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 1 year ago: Welcome to r/EarthPorn!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 1 year ago: Welcome to r/AustralianPolitics! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;A warm and genuine welcome to you, new community member!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;/r/AustralianPolitics&quot;&gt;/r/AustralianPolitics&lt;/a&gt; openly encourages respectful civil and open discussion of Australian Politics across the entire political spectrum.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;The rules are straightforward with civility at their core. You can view them &lt;a href=&quot;https://en.reddit.com/r/AustralianPolitics/about/rules/&quot;&gt;HERE&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Explore your new sub at your leisure. If there are any questions we are only a button click away.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Regards, Your friendly moderation team&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/AustralianPolitics&quot;&gt;r/AustralianPolitics&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/AustralianPolitics&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1edumk7&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1edumk7</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1edumk7"/><updated>2022-06-05T11:55:28+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 1 year ago: Welcome to r/AustralianPolitics!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 1 year ago: Welcome to r/AustralianPolitics!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/reddit</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/reddit</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from reddit sent 1 year ago: Don't forget to verify your email, and opt into our new feature! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Hey there,&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;We see you have an unverified email address associated with your Reddit account. We suggest taking a minute to verify your email. It’ll help you:&lt;/p&gt; &lt;ul&gt; &lt;li&gt;Recover your account if you forget your username or password&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;Receive your reddit messages via email&lt;/li&gt; &lt;/ul&gt; &lt;p&gt;We have your email address as: &lt;a href=&quot;mailto:batan@disroot.org&quot;&gt;batan@disroot.org&lt;/a&gt;. If this is not correct, &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/prefs/update/&quot;&gt;click here to update it&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/changelog/comments/4jnbxe/reddit_change_receive_notifications_as_emails/&quot;&gt;You can read more about this feature here!&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;h2&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/prefs/orangereds/UL5wcQIGZPKWXxqoCntzpr-qv3I&quot;&gt;Click to resend verification email &amp;amp; receive Reddit messages via email&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/h2&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1d1vllz&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1d1vllz</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1d1vllz"/><updated>2022-04-20T09:55:54+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from reddit sent 1 year ago: Don't forget to verify your email, and opt into our new feature!</summary><title>from reddit sent 1 year ago: Don't forget to verify your email, and opt into our new feature!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 1 year ago: Welcome to r/firefox! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Welcome to &lt;a href=&quot;/r/firefox&quot;&gt;r/firefox&lt;/a&gt; and thank you for subscribing!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;If you haven&amp;#39;t already done so, you should &lt;a href=&quot;/r/firefox/wiki/switching-to-firefox/release-channels&quot;&gt;&lt;strong&gt;install Firefox&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/a&gt;. You may want to consider installing a beta version, because you now have the support of a large community on &lt;a href=&quot;/r/firefox&quot;&gt;r/firefox&lt;/a&gt; if you run into issues, and it helps Firefox maintain quality for millions of people.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;If you installed Firefox on your desktop, you should also &lt;a href=&quot;/r/firefox/wiki/switching-to-firefox/release-channels#wiki_mobile&quot;&gt;&lt;strong&gt;install it on your mobile&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/a&gt;, because you can take advantage of &lt;em&gt;password sync&lt;/em&gt; and &lt;em&gt;sending tabs&lt;/em&gt; between your devices.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;Please take a moment to review the &lt;a href=&quot;/r/firefox/about/rules/&quot;&gt;rules&lt;/a&gt; - they are pretty simple, but knowing the rules helps us have a friendly community where we can discuss Firefox.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;If you are switching to Firefox from another browser, you should check out our &lt;a href=&quot;/r/firefox/wiki/switching-to-firefox&quot;&gt;&lt;strong&gt;switching guide&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/a&gt;. If you are interested in adding extensions to Firefox, you can look at our &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/firefox/wiki/recommended-add-ons&quot;&gt;recommended add-ons&lt;/a&gt; page. Don&amp;#39;t go crazy installing add-ons - install based on your needs, because add-ons often come with performance impacts. Keeping your add-ons list light ensures that you have a well performing browser!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;If you are running into issues, (sorry to hear that!) check out our &lt;a href=&quot;/r/firefox/wiki/support/troubleshooting&quot;&gt;&lt;strong&gt;troubleshooting&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/a&gt; page. If you are still running into issues, feel free to make a new post. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;Lastly, have fun. Feel free to ask questions, make comments, and suggest improvements to the sub-reddit. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;If you have feedback about this message, please &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/compose?to=%2Fr%2Ffirefox&amp;amp;subject=Welcome+Message+Feedback&quot;&gt;message the moderators&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/firefox&quot;&gt;r/firefox&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/firefox&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1d1vllp&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1d1vllp</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1d1vllp"/><updated>2022-04-20T09:55:54+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 1 year ago: Welcome to r/firefox!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 1 year ago: Welcome to r/firefox!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/reddit</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/reddit</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from reddit sent 1 year ago: Your 2021 Reddit Recap is here! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Want to know what communities you spent the most time in last year? What your top comment was? Or which post got the attention it so rightly deserved thanks to you?&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/RedditRecap2021&quot;&gt;Check out your 2021 Reddit Recap&lt;/a&gt; to learn all this and more. Make sure to download the latest update to see your Recap if you’re using the Reddit app.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/18h6o7n&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_18h6o7n</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/18h6o7n"/><updated>2021-12-11T08:45:13+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from reddit sent 1 year ago: Your 2021 Reddit Recap is here!</summary><title>from reddit sent 1 year ago: Your 2021 Reddit Recap is here!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 1 year ago: Welcome to r/MXLinux! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;h1&gt;Welcome to the MX Linux Reddit Community&lt;/h1&gt; &lt;h2&gt;This is not an official forum&lt;/h2&gt; &lt;p&gt;We are neither employees of nor sanctioned by MX Linux. This subreddit is meant for news and general discussion by and for fans of MX Linux. You cannot contact the MX admins or developers here. For the official channels, please visit &lt;a href=&quot;https://mxlinux.org/about-us&quot;&gt;mxlinux.org&lt;/a&gt; and find the &amp;quot;Contact Info&amp;quot; near the bottom of the &amp;quot;about us&amp;quot; page.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/MXLinux&quot;&gt;r/MXLinux&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/MXLinux&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/175lhbh&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_175lhbh</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/175lhbh"/><updated>2021-11-03T02:20:57+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 1 year ago: Welcome to r/MXLinux!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 1 year ago: Welcome to r/MXLinux!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 2 years ago: Welcome to r/chess! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Welcome to &lt;a href=&quot;/r/chess&quot;&gt;/r/chess&lt;/a&gt;, Reddit&amp;#39;s home for discussion of all things chess! Before diving into the conversation, please take some time to familiarize yourself with our &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/chess/wiki/rules&quot;&gt;rules.&lt;/a&gt; We also recommend checking out our &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/chess/wiki/faq&quot;&gt;FAQ page&lt;/a&gt; before asking a question.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;We&amp;#39;re glad to welcome you to the community! Have fun, and don&amp;#39;t hesitate to message your friendly neighborhood moderators with any questions or concerns.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/chess&quot;&gt;r/chess&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/chess&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/131xq0e&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_131xq0e</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/131xq0e"/><updated>2021-07-07T07:35:48+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 2 years ago: Welcome to r/chess!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 2 years ago: Welcome to r/chess!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 2 years ago: Welcome to r/linux! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Welcome to &lt;a href=&quot;/r/Linux&quot;&gt;r/Linux&lt;/a&gt;! We&amp;#39;re a community dedicated to the Linux kernel and the ecosystems around it - GNU, GNOME, KDE, and so much more including distributions from Arch to Ubuntu. We&amp;#39;re a news focused sub with constructive discussions about the present and future of Linux.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;We recommend going to &lt;a href=&quot;/r/linuxquestions&quot;&gt;r/linuxquestions&lt;/a&gt; for all of your technical support, as well as browsing &lt;a href=&quot;/r/linux&quot;&gt;r/linux&lt;/a&gt; via &lt;a href=&quot;https://old.reddit.com/r/linux&quot;&gt;https://old.reddit.com/r/linux&lt;/a&gt;!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/linux&quot;&gt;r/linux&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/linux&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/10ot60e&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_10ot60e</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/10ot60e"/><updated>2021-04-15T15:10:24+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 2 years ago: Welcome to r/linux!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 2 years ago: Welcome to r/linux!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/reddit</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/reddit</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from reddit sent 2 years ago: Updates to our User Agreement and Privacy Policy &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Privacy is core to our DNA, our culture, and our values. We are committed to making our policies clear and focused on empowering users to be masters of their identities—and their data. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Periodically, we update our Privacy Policy, User Agreement, and additional terms to keep up with new Reddit features. For example, since we last announced updates, we launched &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/rpan/&quot;&gt;RPAN&lt;/a&gt;, made big changes to Reddit &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/coins&quot;&gt;Coins&lt;/a&gt; and &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/premium&quot;&gt;Premium&lt;/a&gt;, enabled subreddits to offer &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/announcements/comments/chdx1h/introducing_community_awards/&quot;&gt;Community Awards&lt;/a&gt;, and much more. We have also made updates specific to &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.redditgifts.com/&quot;&gt;Reddit Gifts&lt;/a&gt;. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Here are some of the highlights:&lt;/p&gt; &lt;ul&gt; &lt;li&gt;We made small updates throughout our policies and terms to make them clearer, more specific, and easier to reference. &lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;We updated our Privacy Policy to include additional details on how we handle your information and added a new &lt;a href=&quot;https://redditinc.com/policies/cookies&quot;&gt;notice&lt;/a&gt; that describes how we use cookies on Reddit. &lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;We added new terms to our Reddit Premium and Virtual Goods Agreement related to cancellation and refunds.&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;We deleted references to Reddit Marketplace, which is no longer a part of our services.&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;We updated usage rules to better specify things you cannot do on Reddit and Reddit Gifts.&lt;/li&gt; &lt;/ul&gt; &lt;p&gt;These updated terms will take effect on October 15, 2020. They will apply to you if you use Reddit or Reddit Gifts after October 15, 2020.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;ul&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;https://www.redditinc.com/policies/user-agreement&quot;&gt;Reddit User Agreement&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;https://www.redditinc.com/policies/privacy-policy&quot;&gt;Reddit Privacy Policy&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;https://www.redditinc.com/policies/premium-and-virtual-goods-agreement&quot;&gt;Reddit Premium and Virtual Goods Agreement&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;https://www.redditgifts.com/terms/&quot;&gt;Reddit Gifts User Agreement&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;https://www.redditgifts.com/privacy/&quot;&gt;Reddit Gifts Privacy Notice&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;/ul&gt; &lt;p&gt;For more information about privacy on Reddit, visit the &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddithelp.com/en/categories/privacy&quot;&gt;Privacy Help Center&lt;/a&gt;. And, if you would like to review your privacy controls, visit Reddit’s &lt;a href=&quot;https://new.reddit.com/settings/privacy&quot;&gt;Privacy and Security account settings&lt;/a&gt;. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;If you have questions, please visit &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddithelp.com/hc/en-us&quot;&gt;Reddit Help&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;– Reddit&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/sl04ad&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_sl04ad</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/sl04ad"/><updated>2020-09-24T18:39:15+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from reddit sent 2 years ago: Updates to our User Agreement and Privacy Policy</summary><title>from reddit sent 2 years ago: Updates to our User Agreement and Privacy Policy</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 3 years ago: Welcome to r/signal! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;Welcome to &lt;a href=&quot;/r/signal&quot;&gt;r/signal&lt;/a&gt;!&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;em&gt;What is Signal?&lt;/em&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Signal is a messaging service used by millions of people every day for free and instantaneous communication anywhere in the world. Send and receive high-fidelity messages, participate in HD voice/video calls, and explore a growing set of new features that help you stay connected. Signal’s advanced privacy-preserving technology is always enabled, so you can focus on sharing the moments that matter with the people who matter to you. Signal is also an &lt;a href=&quot;https://support.signal.org/hc/en-us/articles/360031949872&quot;&gt;independent 501c3 nonprofit&lt;/a&gt;, and the complete source code for the Signal clients and the Signal server is &lt;a href=&quot;https://github.com/signalapp&quot;&gt;available on GitHub&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;em&gt;What is &lt;a href=&quot;/r/signal&quot;&gt;r/signal&lt;/a&gt;?&lt;/em&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;/r/signal&quot;&gt;r/signal&lt;/a&gt; is an unofficial Reddit community (or &amp;quot;subreddit&amp;quot;) for news and discussion about Signal. We are not affiliated with or endorsed by the Signal Foundation or Signal Messenger LLC. Please take a minute to read our &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/signal/about/rules&quot;&gt;community rules&lt;/a&gt; before posting.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;em&gt;Can I ask for support?&lt;/em&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Of course, but keep in mind that unofficial community support is provided by other Signal users like you. The information here might not always be accurate, so take it with a grain of salt. However, usually there are people around who know the ins and outs of Signal. You might even get a faster reply here during times when the official support channel is busy with large amounts of support requests. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;If you are unsure about something and want an official answer, please don’t hesitate to search Signal’s own &lt;a href=&quot;https://support.signal.org&quot;&gt;knowledge base articles&lt;/a&gt; or submit a &lt;a href=&quot;https://support.signal.org/hc/en-us/requests/new&quot;&gt;support request&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;em&gt;What if I find a bug?&lt;/em&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Please note that this subreddit is not intended to be used as an issue tracker. All discussions about existing functionality that does not work as intended (&amp;quot;bugs&amp;quot;) must therefore include a link to an open bug report on one of Signal&amp;#39;s official issue trackers on GitHub: &lt;a href=&quot;https://github.com/signalapp/Signal-Android/issues&quot;&gt;Signal Android&lt;/a&gt;, &lt;a href=&quot;https://github.com/signalapp/Signal-iOS/issues&quot;&gt;Signal iOS&lt;/a&gt; or &lt;a href=&quot;https://github.com/signalapp/Signal-Desktop/issues&quot;&gt;Signal Desktop&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;This ensures that the issue has been reported, reduces duplication of effort, and helps fellow redditors hop over and have a look at developer feedback, progress, etc. If you are new to reporting bugs, you can learn how to do so &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/signal/wiki/bug&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;em&gt;Where is the best place to submit feature requests and feedback?&lt;/em&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;You’re welcome to discuss your ideas with fellow users here on &lt;a href=&quot;/r/signal&quot;&gt;r/signal&lt;/a&gt;. However, Signal’s developers encourage people to submit their feature requests and feedback on the &lt;a href=&quot;https://community.signalusers.org/&quot;&gt;Signal community forum&lt;/a&gt;, where they also host &lt;a href=&quot;https://community.signalusers.org/c/beta-feedback&quot;&gt;beta feedback discussions&lt;/a&gt; for each upcoming release.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;&lt;em&gt;Can I have flair?&lt;/em&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Sure, we have a few different flairs that users can choose from. To get your own, look in the right-hand sidebar for &amp;quot;Community Options&amp;quot; or &amp;quot;Show my flair in this subreddit. It looks like:&amp;quot;. It&amp;#39;s a little small. If there is a pencil or an [edit] button next to your username, click it to select your flair. Your flair will then be displayed next to your username on all of your posts. If you’re a Signal staff member, message the moderators to get your very own verified blue flair!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/signal&quot;&gt;r/signal&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/signal&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/otxb7l&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_otxb7l</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/otxb7l"/><updated>2020-06-03T12:30:11+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 3 years ago: Welcome to r/signal!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 3 years ago: Welcome to r/signal!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/reddit</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/reddit</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from reddit sent 3 years ago: Hello, /u/bpbatan! Welcome to reddit! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Hello!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Here’s some information to get you started with reddit. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;h3&gt;How it all works&lt;/h3&gt; &lt;ol&gt; &lt;li&gt;Users post to communities, also known as subreddits. &lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;Other users vote and comment on those posts. &lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;Based on those votes, the best posts rise to the top for all to enjoy.&lt;/li&gt; &lt;/ol&gt; &lt;p&gt;Users who post or comment earn karma points when their content gets voted up, or upvoted. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;As you’re participating, be aware that each subreddit has its own unique personality and rules, usually found in their sidebar. Those are the basics! Once you poke around the site a bit, please feel free to check out a more in-depth explanation about &lt;a href=&quot;http://www.redditblog.com/2014/07/how-reddit-works.html&quot;&gt;what reddit is and how it works&lt;/a&gt;. Happy redditing! :)&lt;/p&gt; &lt;h3&gt;By the way...&lt;/h3&gt; &lt;ul&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/help/contentpolicy?utm_source=reddit&amp;amp;utm_medium=welcomepm&quot;&gt;This is our Content Policy&lt;/a&gt;. These are the rules you need to follow to participate on Reddit.&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;We strongly recommend that you verify an email address with your account, so that you can reset your password by email. There is no other way to recover a forgotten password.&lt;/li&gt; &lt;/ul&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/otw130&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_otw130</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/otw130"/><updated>2020-06-03T11:22:37+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from reddit sent 3 years ago: Hello, /u/bpbatan! Welcome to reddit!</summary><title>from reddit sent 3 years ago: Hello, /u/bpbatan! Welcome to reddit!</title></entry></feed>
