= Contents =
                - [[#To Consider:]]
                - [[#The tools available:]]










	== To Consider: ==
			Lenght of
			Proportionally stronger bond with emotional and intellectual life.
		Strategies indentified applied within the circumstantial constrains,
		as far as possible.
			
		`Schadule` completed, prioritazed and stuck by.
		
	== The tools available: ==
			1. Strategy
			2. Schadule
			3. Un
			4. Support Network
			5. Family
			6. Medical professonals
			7. 
			8. .
			9. .
	
	== Triggers ==
			1. A. Hotic and Co
			2. Absance of privacy
			3. Trauma caused by invasion of privacy and ongoing harrasment
			4. Inability to seek professional help
			5. Inability to work caused by previous harrasment at work
			6. Insufficent funds to persue required treatment for cancer

	== Cancer ==
		
		
		- The Cancer council has determend cancer treatment to cost an avarage haushold
			 50k a year. 
		- I live of 19k a year. My job and and additional income is the only way for me to seek treatment beyond chemo and radiation therapy. 
		- I also have a mother, that lives not in relative but absolute poverty in Bosnia and Herzegowina, her income is 350 km/month. 
		- Yet these people, which have indentified them self as A.Hotic and Co, have done everything possible to make my life at home and at work immposible.
		- They have not just made me feel uncomfortable at work, but have tormented me for days without an end prior to my shifts at the Post Office, kept harrasing me while I was in bed couple of hours before work and have kept me awake, to then fuck me while at work. Even on my way to work.
		-  
	



