= Contents =
        - [[#Recommended Firefox add-ons]]
                        - [[#Why Open Source software is important to privacy]]
                        - [[#WebExtensions]]
                        - [[#Browser Fingerprinting]]
                        - [[#Extension limitations]]
                        - [[#Recommended Firefox Privacy and Security add-ons]]
                - [[#uBlock Origin]]
                - [[#Privacy Badger]]
                - [[#HTTPS Everywhere]]
                - [[#NoScript]]
                - [[#uMatrix]]
                - [[#Cookie AutoDelete]]
                - [[#BetterPrivacy]]
                - [[#Random Agent Spoofer]]
                - [[#Canvas Defender]]
                - [[#Decentraleyes]]
                - [[#Bloody Vikings!]]
                - [[#Mailvelope]]
                - [[#keepasshttp-connector]]
                                                - [[#Please check out my KeePass Review for further details.]]

= Recommended Firefox add-ons =



=== Why Open Source software is important to privacy ===

Another reason for its popularity among privacy-heads is the large number of
add-ons available that can greatly improve the privacy and security of your
browsing. In addition to this, it is possible to access Firefox’s deep
configuration settings in order to tweak its privacy and security parameters.

=== WebExtensions ===

In recent months Firefox has transitioned away from its old add-ons framework
to WebExtensions.  As of Firefox 57 "Quantum", it is only possible to use
WebExtensions add-ons. Most of the add-ons listed below have been transitioned
to WebExtensions, or are expected to in the near future.

Please see Are we WebExtensions yet? for the latest news about which add-ons
have been updated to the new platform.

Check out our guide to Firefox VPN web extensions for a detailed look at the
best ones to use.

=== Browser Fingerprinting ===

The way in which your browser is configured (especially the browser plugins
used), together with details of your Operating System, allows you to be
uniquely identified and tracked with a worryingly high degree of accuracy.

A particularly insidious (and ironic) aspect of this is that the more measures
you take to avoid tracking (for example by using the plugins listed below), the
more unique your browser fingerprint becomes.

The best defense against browser fingerprinting is to use as common and plain
vanilla an OS and browser as possible. The hardened Tor browser with Tor
disabled is the usual recommendation here. However, we do cover some
alternative secure web browsers in our secure browsers guide.

Unfortunately, this leaves you open to other forms of attack. It also reduces
the day-to-day functionality of your computer to such an extent that most of us
will find the idea impractical.


=== Extension limitations ===

Remember, a VPN browser extension will only secure your web browser! Any other
apps (like Skype, Outlook, and your video games) won't benefit from its
encryption – and you'll need to install a full VPN client onto your device in
order to secure your entire network.

 

=== Recommended Firefox Privacy and Security add-ons ===

All Firefox add-ons are free and open source software (FOSS).

== uBlock Origin ==

uBlock Origin is a lightweight but powerful ad-blocker that pulls double duty
as an anti-tracking add-on. It uses a number of blocking lists to filter
unwanted content from appearing in your browser. The lists it comes with are
pretty good, but I recommend also adding those compiled by EasyList and Fanboy.

Blocking ads and tracking scripts can break some web pages, making uBlock
Origin’s on-the-fly whitelisting feature very handy. You can also toggle which
types of elements are blocked (pop-ups, large media elements, cosmetic elements
and remote fonts), or use the Element picker and Element Zapper modes to
customize what is permitted to run on a web page.

uBlock Origin works very well in tandem with  Privacy Badger, and I recommend
using both together. It is also worth noting to avoid confusion, that uBlock
Origin is recommended over the very similar uBlock add-on.

== Privacy Badger ==

Developed by the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), this is an excellent
anti-tracking add-on that does double-duty as an ad-blocker. Although there is
some overlap in function, Privacy Badger and uBlock Origin complement each
other and are best run together.

Rather than using blocklists, Privacy Badger keeps track of scripts that are
embedded in web pages. If it detects that a source is tracking you, it "springs
into action, telling your browser not to load any more content from that
source".

Privacy Badger allows you see which tracking scripts are present on a web page
and which ones are actually tracking you. You can then decide how to deal with
them (block, block cookies, or allow), or let Privacy Badger decide.

== HTTPS Everywhere ==

An essential tool. HTTPS Everywhere was developed by the Electronic Frontier
Foundation and tries to ensure that you always connect to websites using a
secure HTTPS connection -  if one is available.

It works because many websites can accept HTTPS connections, but use regular
insecure HTTP ones by default.  Just be aware that if no HTTPS connection is
possible, HTTPS Everywhere will default to an insecure HTTP connection
(although this can be changed in its settings).

It is, therefore, a good idea to keep an eye on the padlock icon in the URL
that shows whether you are using an HTTPS connection.

== NoScript ==

NoScript is a potent tool that gives you unparalleled control over what scripts
are run on your browser. However, many websites will not play game with
NoScript, and it requires a fair bit of technical knowledge to configure and
tweak it to work the way you want it to.

It is easy to add exceptions to a whitelist, but even this requires some
understanding of the risks that might be involved. Not for the casual user
then, but for web-savvy power-users, NoScript is challenging to beat.

Note that if you use NoScript, you do not also need to use uBlock Origin +
privacy Badger or uMatrix.

See here for some tips on getting the best out of NoScript. The last one is
particularly worth paying attention to. It is worth keeping NoScript installed
even if you "Allow Scripts Globally", as this still protects against nasty
things such as cross-site scripting and clickjacking

== uMatrix ==

Developed by the team behind uBlock Origin, uMatrix is something of a half-way
house between that and NoScript. It provides a great deal of customizable
protection but requires a fair bit of work and know-how to set up correctly.

uMatrix is not as hard to configure as NoScript and does not break as many
sites. But neither is it as comprehensive.

Note that if you use uMatrix, then it is not necessary to also use uBlock
Origin + Privacy Badger or NoScript.

== Cookie AutoDelete ==

A drop-in replacement for the popular but now defunct Self-Destructing Cookies,
 Cookie AutoDelete automatically deletes HTTP (regular) cookies when you close
the browser tab that set them. This provides a high level of protection from
tracking via cookies without "breaking" websites.

Cookie AutoDelete also provides some protection against Flash/zombie cookies
and ETags, and cleans DOM storage (although it can't clean local storage yet).

Note that Cookie AutoDelete and BetterPrivacy complement each other, and I
recommend running them both together.

== BetterPrivacy ==

This add-on controls Flash cookies. It should be configured to remove these
automatically on a regular basis.

There is an argument that BetterPrivacy is now redundant as Flash is used much
less by websites than it used to be. Personally, I think it is still worth
running. It is recommended to run this add-on and Self-Destructing Cookies
together.

Note that at time of writing BetterPrivacy has been removed by its author from
official Firefox Add-on website. The WebExtensions version is in beta, however,
so we should hopefully see it reappear soon.

== Random Agent Spoofer ==

A web browser user agent tells website what type of computer, what OS, and what
browser you are using. Many sites use this information to optimize their pages
to improve user experience, but this information can be used for browser
fingerprinting.

Random Agent Spoofer randomly changes what user agent information is given to a
website. For example, it can tell a website that you are accessing it on an
iPhone using Safari, rather than on a PC using Firefox.

Note that there is some debate on how effective Random Agent Spoofer and
similar add-ons are at preventing Browser Fingerprinting.  It is true that
using an unmodified generic browser such as the Tor Browser is almost certainly
better in this regard. But if you are using other add-ons which make your
browser more unique, changing your user agent is probably useful.

== Canvas Defender ==

Canvas fingerprinting is the most common form of browser fingerprinting. It
uses a script that asks your browser to draw a hidden image, and uses tiny
variations in how the image is drawn to generate a unique ID code which can
then be used to track you. Canvas Defender helps prevent this by creating a
unique and persistent noise that hides your real canvas fingerprint.

Note that at the time of writing, Mozilla has promised upcoming versions of
Firefox will feature built-in canvas fingerprinting protection. If and when
this becomes available, Canvas Defender should become redundant, Until then,
however, I strongly recommend its use.

== Decentraleyes ==

This add- aims to improve your privacy while browsing by hosting CND resources
locally. When your browser requests one of these CDN resources, the application
is blocked, and you are served up a local version instead.

If the above just sounds like techno-babble to you, please check out my
Decentraleyes Review for a full explanation.

== Bloody Vikings! ==

Bloody Vikings is an easy-peasy way to create temporary email addresses.

Just right-click in an email registration field, select ‘Bloody Vikings’ (or
expand to see a choice of services), and a newly generated email address will
be inserted into the field while a new browser tab opens to the temporary
mailbox.

== Mailvelope ==

PGP is by far the most secure way to send private emails. But it is a pain in
the butt to use. Such a significant pain, in fact, that few people bother.
Mailvelope is a browser add-on that allows end-to-end PGP encryption within
Firefox.

It works with popular browser-based webmail services such as Gmail, Hotmail,
Yahoo!, and GMX. It makes using PGP about as painless as it gets. However, it
is not as secure as using PGP with a dedicated email client. Check out my
detailed look at Mailvelope here.

== keepasshttp-connector ==

KeePassis a fantastic open source password manager. keepasshttp-connector is a
Firefox add-on that brings full browser integration to KeePass.

====== Please check out my KeePass Review for further details. ======

 Privacy Settings

Firefox allows quite fine-grained control of its privacy settings, but to do
this requires accessing its advanced configuration settings using about:config.
I describe how to do this, plus provide an extensive list of privacy-related
settings below.

Privacy Settings, however, allows you easy ‘one-click’ control of many of these
settings using a simple GUI interface. Because it merely flips configuration
settings, you can install the add-on, disable whichever settings you prefer,
and then uninstall Privacy Settings to save browser resources.

