				= How to make Firefox More Secure Using about:config =





		Built into Firefox are a number of "under the hood" settings. These can be
		changed to improve your privacy and security when browsing.
		
		To access Firefox’s advanced configuration settings, type about:config into the
		search bar, and hit enter.
		
		While it might be possible to do some damage, this warning seems a bit strong
		to us! Click "I accept the risk!" if you are feeling brave enough.
		
		You will now see the configuration screen, with Preference Name’s listed in
		alphabetical order (by default).
		
		To change a boolean entry (i.e. it has a true/false value), simply double-click
		anywhere on the entry line. To change an integer (i.e. numeric value),
		double-click the entry and enter a numeric value.
		
		To change a string value, double-click the entry and enter the required text.
		
		When you see an option in bold in the about:config pane, it has been changed
		from its default value.
		
		Where an entry is marked with an asterisk*, I strongly suggest that you follow
		my advice.
		
		Warning: Some websites rely on features we discuss disabling for security
		reasons below. Disabling these features will therefore "break" some websites
		(causing problems when using them, or even causing them to refuse to load
		altogether).
		
		The good news is that simply re-enabling the relevant features will un-break
		the affected websites, so you may require some trial-and-error to find the
		right balance between maximum security and accessing the services you use.
		
	=== browser.privatebrowsing.autostart ===
		
		The Private Browsing mode was introduced to stop you leaving any embarrassing
		trails of what you have been up to for other users of your browser to find.
		Most importantly it stops (most) cookies and does not record any History of
		websites you have visited or forms you have filled in.
		
		The critical thing to remember is that Private Browsing is excellent for
		protecting your privacy from others using the same computer, but does little to
		protect someone from the outside seeing what you get up to (e.g. your ISP).
		
		Even if you are the sole user of a computer, it is still a good idea to always
		surf the internet in Private Browsing mode, thanks to its cookie blocking
		features in particular.
		
		By setting this Preference to true you will automatically start Firefox in
		Private Browsing mode, so you will never forget to turn it on.
		
	=== browser.safebrowsing.phishing.enabled* ===
		
		Firefox ships with the Google Safe Browsing extension built-in and enabled by
		default. Designed to prevent phishing, it compares the websites you visit to a
		Google-run blacklist. This means that Google is constantly able to track you.
		
		If you have installed our recommended Firefox extensions (see above) then you
		will gain no additional protection from Google Safe Browsing, while telling
		Google a great deal about your browsing history. I therefore strongly recommend
		that you turn it off by setting the value to false.
		
	=== browser.safebrowsing.malware.enabled* ===
		
		Safe Browsing (now renamed Phishing Protection) is basically a version of
		Google Safe Browsing licensed to Mozilla (but which still reports to Google).
		I, therefore, recommend that you set it to false, for the same reasons as
		above. Click here for the Mozilla help entry.
		
		Note that there are a lot of browser.safebrowsing.xxx settings, and it may be
		worth going through them all and disabling them/deleting their string values.
		
	=== browser.startup.homepage ===
		
		By default, Firefox will start on the Mozilla Firefox Start Page, displaying a
		Google search box. Google (along with most major commercial search engines such
		as Bing! and Yahoo!) stores a great deal of information about you, including a
		record of the searches you make.
		
		To start on a different page, simply enter the website address of your
		preferred choice. I use StartPage, but please check out our Privacy Search
		Engines Group Review for a rundown of the best options available. Click here
		for the Mozilla help entry.
		
	=== browser.startup.page ===
		
		If you prefer to start Firefox on a blank page, change this setting to ‘0
		
	=== datareporting.healthreport.uploadEnabled ===
		
		You can see details about your Firefox browser’s performance and stability any
		time by reviewing the Firefox Health Report (Firefox tab -> Help -> Firefox
		Health Report). By default, this report is periodically sent to Mozilla (in
		anonymous aggregate form) to help it understand problems and plan future
		developments.
		
		For maximum security, you should prevent this by setting this entry to false
		(you will still be able to see your report, it just won’t be sent to Mozilla).
		
	=== dom.event.clipboardevents.enabled* ===
		
		If you cut, copy or paste something from a website, then the website owners can
		get notified of exactly which part of a webpage you have cut, copied or pasted.
		If they wish, they can then record or modify the text, or prevent you from
		copying (etc.). They can also prevent you from pasting text into online forms.
		
		By setting this entry to false you prevent websites knowing where you pasted
		their text, and as a side benefit will be able to bypass restrictions on
		cutting and pasting).
		
	=== dom.storage.enabled* ===
		
		I discuss the dangers of DOM storage (also known as web storage) in "More
		things that go bump in the night: HTTP ETags, Web Storage, and ‘history
		stealing". Basically, this way of storing information within web browsers is
		one of the most pernicious methods used by commercial internet companies to
		track you across the web and is growing in popularity as netizens become more
		aware of the danger of ‘regular’ cookies.
		
		Fortunately, DOM storage is easy to turn off by setting this entry to false.
		
		Update: Thanks to feedback from readers, it is clear that setting
		dom.storage.enabled to false can "break" some website. Changing this setting
		should, therefore, be done with caution.
		
	=== geo.enabled* ===
		
		When you visit a "location-aware" website you will be asked if you want to
		share your location. If you answer yes then Firefox will send information about
		nearby wireless access points and your computer’s IP address to Google Location
		Service, and then pass that information on to the website (a random client
		identifier is also assigned by Google, which expires every 2 weeks).
		
		Although you should be asked every time this happens, and need to give your
		explicit consent, you can prevent giving consent accidentally or through
		carelessness by turning this feature off (set the value to false). Click here
		for the Mozilla help entry.
		
		=== geo.wifi.uri ===
		
		This setting determines the geolocation service used (Google Location Service
		by default). If you set geo.enabled (above) to false, then this setting
		shouldn’t matter. If it makes you feel better, however, then you can change it
		to 127.0.0.1 (also known as localhost or the ‘loopback address’).
		
		In theory, this setting could point to an alternative service, but none such
		really exist at the moment. Click here for the Mozilla help entry.
		
		=== media.peerconnection.enabled ===
		
		Web Real-Time Communication (WebRTC) is a potentially useful standard that
		allows browsers to incorporate features such as voice calling, video chat, and
		P2P file sharing directly into your browser.
		
		A good example of this is the new Firefox Hello video and chat client that lets
		you talk securely to anyone else using an up-to-date Firefox, Chrome, or Opera
		browser, without the need to download any add-on or configure any new settings.
		
		Unfortunately for VPN users, WebRTC allows a website (or other WebRTC service)
		to directly detect your host machine’s true IP address, regardless of whether
		you are using a proxy server or VPN. Some modern VPN clients will block WebRCT
		leaks, but it is safest to disable in your browser entirely. To do so, change
		this value to false.
		
		=== network.cookie.cookieBehavior ===
		
		If you use a good cookie manager such as Cookie AutoDelete (recommended), then
		you will not need to touch this preference. If not, then it is probably a good
		idea to set it to ‘1’ (only cookies from the originating server are allowed).
		
		=== network.cookie.lifetimePolicy ===
		
		Again, using the Cookie AutoDelete add-on is probably the best policy, but if
		you prefer not to, then you can control when cookies expire by setting this
		setting to ‘2’ (the cookie expires at the end of the session (when the browser
		closes)).
		
		=== network.dns.disablePrefetch ===
		
		Firefox improves page load times by resolving domain names ‘proactively and in
		parallel’ (i.e. it pre-fetches the information).  In their paper ‘DNS
		Prefetching and Its Privacy Implications: When Good Things Go Bad’, Srinivas
		Krishnan and Fabian Monrose argue that this practice can lead to "privacy
		threats that are ripe for abuse. More specifically… where it is possible to
		infer the likely search terms issued by clients using a given DNS resolver".
		
		DNS prefetching can be turned off by setting this value to true. If you can’t
		find this setting then you will have to add it manually by right-clicking on
		the about:config screen, selecting ‘New’ -> ‘Boolean’ and entering ‘
		network.dns.disablePrefetch’ into the dialog box.
		
		=== network.http.sendRefererHeader ===
		
		When you click on a hyperlink, the page you go to can request information about
		the page you clicked the link from. This information is contained in the
		‘referer header’, and can be used to track you across a website.
		
		Furthermore, Javascript scripts can "see" and reference the referrer header if
		this setting is turned on. Although Mozilla cautions that disabling referrer
		headings may cause problems with some websites, we advise changing the setting
		to ‘0’ (never send the referer header or set ‘document.referrer’).
		
		=== network.http.sendSecureXSiteReferrer* ===
		
		More or less the same as the entry above, except that it allows you to be
		tracked across websites. You can disable this setting by changing the value to
		false.
		
		=== network.prefetch-next* ===
		
		Firefox speeds up the browsing process by scanning links on a webpage, and
		pre-downloading linked-to webpages when idle. Although disabling this
		preference will slow down browsing somewhat, from a privacy perspective you
		really should set it to false. .
		
		=== privacy.donottrackheader.enabled* ===
		
		Most modern browsers now support a "Do not track’ feature, which asks websites
		not to track you, and Firefox is no exception. While this should most certainly
		be turned on (set to true), you should be aware that compliance from websites
		is entirely voluntary. So the protection it affords can be considered fairly
		minimal.
		
		=== privacy.donottrackheader.value* ===
		
		While the privacy.donottrackheader.enabled (above) setting determines whether a
		‘Do not track’ instruction is sent to a website, this setting determines what
		that instruction actually says.
		
		You should, therefore, set it to 1 to request that websites do not track you (a
		header stating consent to being tracked is sent to all websites if
		privacy.donottrackheader.enabled is set True).
		
		=== privacy.trackingprotection.enabled ===
		
		This enables a blocklist based on Disconnect’s blocklist, to help prevent
		cross-site tracking. Once Tracking Protection is activated, you will see a
		shield in your address bar whenever Firefox is blocking either tracking domains
		or mixed content.
		
		As a side-benefit, this setting also causes pages to load 44 percent quicker on
		average, data usage drops by 29 percent when connecting to the top 200 Alexa
		websites, and the number of HTTP cookies stored by the browser falls by 67.5%.
		
		=== toolkit.telemetry.enabled ===
		
		Telemetry covers all sorts of statistical data related to your browser’s
		performance, usage, and responsiveness. Firefox can send anonymous reports with
		this data to Mozilla, which is of great assistance to developers, and for this
		reason, you may consider turning it on, but for maximum privacy, you should
		check that it is false. Click here for the Mozilla help entry.
		
		Additional Notes
		
		Private Browsing (aka incognito mode)
		
		Like most modern browsers, Firefox offers a Private Browsing mode.
		Unfortunately, this feature is often poorly understood. This can be very
		dangerous.
		
		When you open a Private Window, pages you visit are not added to the browser’s
		History, text you enter into forms and search bars is not saved, passwords,
		downloads, cookies, and temporary internet files are also not saved.
		
		This makes Private Browsing great at hiding what you get up to on the internet
		from family members and others who have access to your computer. There is a
		reason private browsing is often referred to as porn mode!
		
		Firefox 57+ enables Tracking Protection in Private Browsing by default, but in
		general, Private Browsing does not hide what you get up to on the internet from
		your ISP. Nor does it hide your real IP address from websites you visit.
		
		Private Browsing is therefore great for hiding what you get up to online from
		your family, but will not hide what you get up to online from anyone else. To
		hide what you get up to online from the rest of the world, you need to use a
		VPN or Tor.
		
		Firefox Privacy Conclusion
		
		Firefox is an excellent browser for privacy and security, but there are lots of
		things you can do make it even more so! The elephant in the room is that
		modifying your Firefox browser in many ways makes you more unique, and
		therefore more susceptible to browser fingerprinting techniques. Unfortunately
		there is currently no way to square this circle.
		
