
w3m: Can't load dump.
Calmar on: Fritz Chess (Chessbase.com) runs under Linux with WINE !!!

I strongly suggest ICC or of course FICS

Because chessbase is obviously a shitty company. I have a original CD. However
they won't help to recover the nick or let me make a new one - DESPITE a valid
Serial-Nr.

They wanted a buy-reciept - what I don't have anymore. Why would they care, I
have the orignal Software CD+Cover and original Serial Number etc.

Als unlike in the past, there are not that many good players anymore to kibitz.

So they shall have their 'meanness' in their own throat hopefully.

Ich empfehle den ICC oder natuerlich den FICS und rate von Chessbase ab.

Ich bin im Besitze einer gueltigen Seriennummer - nur ging der Nick verloren -
anscheined geloescht meinten die. Die Seriennummer ist aber immer noch gueltig!
Die helfen aber auf keine Weise, ausser ich wuerde den Kaufbeleg noch haben,
was ich nicht habe.

Aber ich habe alles originale, CD, Booklet, Seriennummer etc - daran zweifeln
auch die nicht.

Also wenn die nicht imstande sind den alten verloeren Nick wieder herzustellen,
wieso kann ich keinen neuen machen? Fuer was zum Kuckuck habe ich eine gueltige
Seriennummer??

So sitze ich also auf dem Schaden.

Ausserdem hat es wesentlich die besseren Spieler auf ICC - zwecks Kibitzen.
Wird wohl auch seinen Grund haben - und das obwohl die Software ansich
eigentlich fast besser ist als die ICC Varianten.

So moege deren 'Geiz ist geil' und Kundenunfreundlichkeit doch in deren eigenen
Kehlen steckenbleiben - fair ist fair.

━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

Some Useful Links:

  • http://www.winehq.com/ The Home of 'Wine'!
  • http://www.chesslecture.com / Great Chess-Videos of all sorts (by IM/GM's)!
    Huge Archive as well


If you want to run Fritz 8/chessbase on Linux with the help of wine .. well it
works on my machine:

Installation:

  • OS-Info: I have a linuxfromscratch.org in the version 5.0 running.
  • With about all the packages which are in beyond.linuxfromscratch.org (e.g.:
    Xfree 4.3.01,..
  • I downloaded Wine-20041018.tar.gz, extracted the package with

          tar -xzf Wine-20031212.tar.gz

    moved into the package dir with:

          cd wine-20041018

    installed the package with:

          ./tools/wineinstall

  • I let the script make "make depend && make && make install".
  • Then I let the script create the .wine/config file and I answered YES when
    it asked me if I want a 'ONLY-Wine installation'.
  • I provided the sript with a path to my 'artificial C: windows drive' when
    it asked me about it. I have chosen ~/c (/home/calmar/c in my case) .. what
    finally installed the packages in /usr/local and the 'fake C: drive in '/
    home/calmar/c.
  • I mounted the Fritz CD-Rom, and did a wine Setup.exe. That broke down with
    an error message, that I need to copy a [windows]/winnt/system32/
    stdole32.tlb to the fake Win-Drive. In my case : ~/c/windows/system. So I
    did that (I had win2000 just on an other partition ... for webdevelopment,
    I need IE). Then I tried again a 'wine Setup.exe' on the CD, and the
    install process finished successfully!

    Now I can execute Fritz with:

          wine ~/c/Program
          Files/ChessBase/ChessProgram8/ChessProgram8.exe

    or create a script file, and place this anywhere into your $PATH

          cat > fritz <<EOF
          #!/bin/bash
          wine /home/"username"/c/Program\
          Files/ChessBase/ChessProgram8/ChessProgram8.exe
          EOF
          chmod a+x fritz

have fun!


please report errors or comments to calmar's mailbox .. thanks!

Fritz in action on GNU Linux


