= Contents =
    - [[#I2P]]
    - [[#i2p]]
        - [[#Installation and Configuration of I2P on Linux:]]
            - [[#Download I2P:]]
            - [[#Start I2P:]]
            - [[#Configure I2P:]]
            - [[#Check Router Status:]]

= I2P =


Installation on Debian/Ubuntu Linux:
	-> Add I2P Repository:

Open a terminal.
	-> Add the I2P repository to your package manager:
`sudo echo "deb https://deb.i2p2.no/ stable main" >> /etc/apt/sources.list.d/i2p.list
`
	-> Import I2P Signing Key:

	-> Import the I2P signing key to authenticate the packages:

`wget https://geti2p.net/_static/i2p-debian-repo.key.asc
sudo apt-key add i2p-debian-repo.key.asc`

	-> Update and Install I2P:

	-> Update your package list and install I2P:

sudo apt-get update
`sudo apt-get install i2p`
Start I2P Service:

	-> Start the I2P service:
`sudo service i2p start
`	-> Access I2P Router Console:

Open a web browser and navigate to http://localhost:7657/
Follow the instructions to configure and use the I2P router console.a

##############################################################################################

= i2p =
== Installation and Configuration of I2P on Linux: ==
=== Download I2P: ===

Visit the I2P download page and choose the appropriate installer for your system.

For Linux, you can download the Debian package or use the provided commands.

# Example for Debian/Ubuntu-based systems
```
sudo apt-add-repository ppa:i2p-maintainers/i2p
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install i2p
```
=== Start I2P: ===

After installation, start the I2P router:
```
sudo service i2p start
```
Access I2P Console:

Open a web browser and go to http://localhost:7657/ to access the I2P router console.
=== Configure I2P: ===

Follow the initial setup instructions on the console.
Configure bandwidth settings based on your preferences.
Connect to I2P Network:

On the console, navigate to "Client Configuration" to configure your client settings.
Adjust the "Outbound tunnels" and "Inbound tunnels" settings according to your preferences.
Enable and Configure SAM Bridge (Optional):

If you plan to use applications that require SAM (Socket And Messenger) API, enable and configure the SAM bridge in the console under "SAM Application Bridge."
Integrate with Browser:

For anonymous browsing, configure your browser to use the I2P proxy. Set the proxy settings to 127.0.0.1 at port 4444.
Explore I2P Sites:

Visit I2P sites by appending .i2p to the site's address. For example, http://example.i2p.
Additional Settings (Optional):

Explore additional settings on the console to customize I2P behavior based on your requirements.
Restart I2P Router (Optional):

After making significant changes, you might need to restart the I2P router for the changes to take effect:
```
sudo service i2p restart
```
=== Check Router Status: ===
Monitor the router's status on the console to ensure it's connected and working properly.
By following these steps, you should have I2P installed and configured on your Linux system. Remember to refer to the official documentation for any specific details or troubleshooting.

