
Configuring an outproxy in I2P involves adjusting your browser settings or I2P router.
Let’s explore the steps for different scenarios:


		Using a Web Browser (Firefox or Chrome):
		========================================
	-	Firefox:
Open Firefox and go to the Menu (top-right corner).
Select Preferences.
Scroll down to the Network Proxy section.
Click on Settings.
In the Connection Settings pop-up, choose Manual proxy configuration.
Set both the HTTP and SSL Proxy to address 127.0.0.1 with port 4444.
Ensure that the property media.peerConnection.ice.proxy_only is set to True in about:config.
	-	Chrome:
Create a new profile in Chrome specifically for I2P browsing (separate from the default profile).
Install the I2PChrome.js extension in your newly-created profile.
Detailed instructions may vary based on the specific Chrome variant and platform you’re using12.
		Using I2P Router Console (StormyCloud Outproxy):
		================================================
Open your I2P router console page.
Navigate to your Tunnel Manager.
Open your HTTP Proxy configuration.
Under the Outproxies section, specify the exit address as exit.stormycloud.i2p or 5d4s7pcvfdpftfk7npc7hllyujhufsdprtrf4o53i44rgsa2xbwa.b32.i2p3.
		Using I2P Settings (Gedsh/InviZible):
		=====================================
Open the I2P Settings menu.
Enable HTTP outproxy.
Ensure you’re using the correct outproxy address (e.g., 4uhjrmilirueyiaps7qshnyhbamyxusyjcbiy6lwh7oq5wyqisbq.b32.i2p:8888)2.
		Advanced Configuration (i2pd):
		==============================
If you’re using i2pd, modify the configuration file:
Uncomment and set outproxy.enabled to true.
Specify the outproxy address (usually 127.0.0.1) and port (e.g., 9050)4.
Remember that configuring an outproxy bridges the I2P network with the Clearnet, so choose wisely based on your privacy needs and trust in the outproxy provider.
