= kitty_mappable_actions =
== Mappable actions ==

The actions described below can be mapped to any key press or mouse action using the map and mouse_map directives in kitty.conf. For configuration examples, see the default shortcut links for each action. To read about keyboard mapping in more detail, see Making your keyboard dance.
Copy/paste
clear_selection

Clear the current selection

copy_and_clear_or_interrupt

Copy the selected text from the active window to the clipboard and clear selection, if no selection, send SIGINT (aka ctrl+c)

copy_ansi_to_clipboard

Copy the selected text from the active window to the clipboard with ANSI formatting codes

copy_or_interrupt

Copy the selected text from the active window to the clipboard, if no selection, send SIGINT (aka ctrl+c)

copy_to_clipboard

Copy the selected text from the active window to the clipboard

Default shortcuts using this action: ctrl+shift+c

pass_selection_to_program

Pass the selected text from the active window to the specified program

Default shortcuts using this action: ctrl+shift+o

paste

Paste the specified text into the current window. ANSI C escapes are decoded.

show_first_command_output_on_screen

Show output from the first shell command on screen in a pager like less

Requires Shell integration to work

show_last_command_output

Show output from the last shell command in a pager like less

Requires Shell integration to work

Default shortcuts using this action: ctrl+shift+g

show_last_non_empty_command_output

Show the last non-empty output from a shell command in a pager like less

Requires Shell integration to work

show_last_visited_command_output

Show the first command output below the last scrolled position via scroll_to_prompt

or the last mouse clicked command output in a pager like less

Requires Shell integration to work

show_scrollback

Show scrollback in a pager like less

Default shortcuts using this action: ctrl+shift+h

copy_to_buffer

Copy the selection from the active window to the specified buffer

See Multiple copy/paste buffers for details.

paste_from_buffer

Paste from the specified buffer to the active window

See Multiple copy/paste buffers for details.

paste_from_clipboard

Paste from the clipboard to the active window

Default shortcuts using this action: ctrl+shift+v

paste_from_selection

Paste from the primary selection, if present, otherwise the clipboard to the active window

Default shortcuts using this action: ctrl+shift+s
Debugging
dump_lines_with_attrs

Show a dump of the current lines in the scrollback + screen with their line attributes

close_shared_ssh_connections

Close all shared SSH connections

See share_connections for details.

debug_config

Show the effective configuration kitty is running with

Default shortcuts using this action: ctrl+shift+f6

show_kitty_env_vars

Show the environment variables that the kitty process sees
Layouts
goto_layout

Switch to the named layout

In case there are multiple layouts with the same name and different options, specify the full layout definition or a unique prefix of the full definition.

For example:

map f1 goto_layout tall
map f2 goto_layout fat:bias=20

last_used_layout

Go to the previously used layout

layout_action

Perform a layout specific action. See Arrange windows for details

next_layout

Go to the next enabled layout. Can optionally supply an integer to jump by the specified number.

Default shortcuts using this action: ctrl+shift+l

toggle_layout

Toggle the named layout

Switches to the named layout if another layout is current, otherwise switches to the last used layout. Useful to “zoom” a window temporarily by switching to the stack layout. For example:

map f1 toggle_layout stack

Marks
remove_marker

Remove a previously created marker

scroll_to_mark

Scroll to the next or previous mark of the specified type

toggle_marker

Toggle the current marker on/off

create_marker

Create a new marker
Miscellaneous
send_key

Send the specified keys to the active window.

Note that the key will be sent only if the current keyboard mode of the program running in the terminal supports it. Both key press and key release are sent. First prnagement
close_other_tabs_in_os_window

Close all the tabs in the current OS window other than the currently active tab

close_tab

Close the current tab

Default shortcuts using this action: ctrl+shift+q

detach_tab

Detach a tab, moving it to anoth
Reset window sizes undoing any dynamic resizing of windows

re
