You:
  please Instruct on minidlna install and config detailed on linux

ChatGPT:
  To install and configure MiniDLNA (DLNA server) on Linux, follow these steps:

  1. Install MiniDLNA: Use the package manager of your Linux distribution to install MiniDLNA. For example, on Ubuntu or Debian,
  run:
    sudo apt-get install minidlna

  2. Configure MiniDLNA: Open the configuration file using a text editor:
    sudo nano /etc/minidlna.conf

  3. Configure Media Directories: Locate the  media_dir  section and add the directories you want to share:
    media_dir=/path/to/media/directory
  You can add multiple  media_dir  entries for different directories. Replace  /path/to/media/directory  with the actual path to
  your media directory.
  4. Specify App Name and Model: In the  friendly_name  section, set the name that will appear for your DLNA server:
    friendly_name=My DLNA Server
  Optionally, adjust other settings according to your preferences.
  5. Enable Automatic Rescanning: Uncomment the  inotify=yes  line to enable automatic rescanning of media directories when files
  are added or removed.
  6. Save and Close the File: Press  Ctrl + O , followed by  Enter , to save the changes. Then press  Ctrl + X  to exit the editor.
  7. Restart MiniDLNA: Restart the MiniDLNA service to apply the configuration changes:
    sudo service minidlna restart
  Alternatively, use  sudo systemctl restart minidlna  if your system uses  systemd .
  8. Allow Firewall Access: If a firewall is enabled, allow incoming connections on the MiniDLNA port (default: TCP 8200):
    sudo ufw allow 8200
  Adjust the firewall command according to your specific firewall management tool.
  9. Connect and Stream: On DLNA/UPnP compatible devices or media players, browse and select your MiniDLNA server. You should see
  the shared media directories and be able to stream content to your device.

  Remember to adjust the configuration file ( /etc/minidlna.conf ) based on your requirements and media library setup, such as
  specific media types, transcoding options, or customization of server settings.
