



NextDNS _first analasis_
This device is not using NextDNS.
This device is currently using ”Cloudflare” as DNS resolver.
Endpoints
Set up NextDNS with this profile using one of the endpoints below.
ID
693d99
DNS-over-TLS/QUIC
693d99.dns.nextdns.io
DNS-over-HTTPS
https://dns.nextdns.io/693d99
IPv6
2a07:a8c0::69:3d99
2a07:a8c1::69:3d99
Not sure how to use those? Follow the Setup Guide.
Linked IP
If you are unable to set up NextDNS using our apps, DNS-over-TLS, DNS-over-HTTPS or IPv6, then use the DNS servers below and link your IP. This is mostly for use on home networks and not recommended on mobile.
DNS Servers
45.90.28.189
45.90.30.189
Linked IP
Setup Guide
Follow the instructions below to set up NextDNS on your device, browser or router.
Android
iOS
Windows
macOS
Linux
ChromeOS
Browsers
Routers
RECOMMENDED
systemd-resolved
Use the following in /etc/systemd/resolved.conf:
[Resolve]
DNS=45.90.28.0#693d99.dns.nextdns.io
DNS=2a07:a8c0::#693d99.dns.nextdns.io
DNS=45.90.30.0#693d99.dns.nextdns.io
DNS=2a07:a8c1::#693d99.dns.nextdns.io
DNSOverTLS=yes
OR
NextDNS Command-Line Client
1. Run the following command: sh -c "$(curl -sL https://nextdns.io/install)"
2. Follow the instructions.
Head over to our open-source repository at https://github.com/nextdns/nextdns/wiki for manual installation instructions.
OR
IPv6
Your network does not support IPv6
Change your DNS servers to 2a07:a8c0::69:3d99 and 2a07:a8c1::69:3d99.
OR
IPv4 (with Linked IP)
Change your DNS servers to 45.90.28.189 and 45.90.30.189.
OR
dnsmasq
Use the following in dnsmasq.conf:
no-resolv
bogus-priv
strict-order
server=2a07:a8c1::
server=45.90.30.0
server=2a07:a8c0::
server=45.90.28.0
add-cpe-id=693d99
OR
Stubby
Use the following in stubby.yml:
round_robin_upstreams: 1
upstream_recursive_servers:
  - address_data: 45.90.28.0
    tls_auth_name: "693d99.dns.nextdns.io"
  - address_data: 2a07:a8c0::0
    tls_auth_name: "693d99.dns.nextdns.io"
  - address_data: 45.90.30.0
    tls_auth_name: "693d99.dns.nextdns.io"
  - address_data: 2a07:a8c1::0
    tls_auth_name: "693d99.dns.nextdns.io"
Make sure Stubby is linked with OpenSSL 1.1.1 or higher as previous versions will not work with NextDNS.
OR
DNSCrypt
Use the following in dnscrypt-proxy.toml:
server_names = ['NextDNS-693d99']

[static]
  [static.'NextDNS-693d99']
  stamp = 'sdns://AgEAAAAAAAAAAAAOZG5zLm5leHRkbnMuaW8HLzY5M2Q5OQ'
OR
Knot Resolver
Use the following in /etc/kresd/custom.conf:
policy.add(policy.all(policy.TLS_FORWARD({
  {'45.90.28.0', hostname='693d99.dns.nextdns.io'},
  {'2a07:a8c0::', hostname='693d99.dns.nextdns.io'},
  {'45.90.30.0', hostname='693d99.dns.nextdns.io'},
  {'2a07:a8c1::', hostname='693d99.dns.nextdns.io'}
})))
OR
cloudflared
Use the following in /usr/local/etc/cloudflared/config.yml:
proxy-dns: true
proxy-dns-upstream:
 - https://dns.nextdns.io/693d99
OR
Unbound
Use the following in unbound.conf:
forward-zone:
  name: "."
  forward-tls-upstream: yes
  forward-addr: 45.90.28.0#693d99.dns.nextdns.io
  forward-addr: 2a07:a8c0::#693d99.dns.nextdns.io
  forward-addr: 45.90.30.0#693d99.dns.nextdns.io
  forward-addr: 2a07:a8c1::#693d99.dns.nextdns.io
As a recursive resolver, Unbound chases CNAMEs. This may result in unexpected behavior when used in conjunction with a blocking DNS resolver like NextDNS. See github.com/NLnetLabs/unbound/issues/132.
Identify your devices
Follow the instructions below to identify your devices in Analytics and Logs.
DNS-over-TLS/QUIC
Prepend the name to the provided domain (the name should only contain a-z, A-Z, 0-9 and -). Use -- for spaces.
For "John Router", you would use John--Router-693d99.dns.nextdns.io as your DNS-over-TLS endpoint.
DNS-over-HTTPS
Append the name to the provided URL (the name should be URL encoded).
For "John's Firefox", you would use https://dns.nextdns.io/693d99/John's%20Firefox as your DNS-over-HTTPS endpoint.
Apps
Enable "Send Device Name" in the app settings.
