= Contents =
        - [[#pwman3]]
                - [[#1. Initialize a New Password Database:]]
                - [[#2. Add a New Password Entry:]]
                - [[#3. List All Password Entries:]]
                - [[#4. Retrieve a Password:]]
                - [[#5. Update a Password Entry:]]
                - [[#6. Remove a Password Entry:]]
                - [[#7. Copy a Password to Clipboard:]]
                - [[#8. Search for a Password Entry:]]
                - [[#9. Export Password Database:]]
                - [[#10. Import Password Database:]]

= pwman3 =

== 1. Initialize a New Password Database: ==

`pwman3 init`
This command initializes a new password database. It prompts you to set up a master password.
== 2. Add a New Password Entry: ==

`pwman3 add -s "example.com" -u "username" -p`
Adds a new entry for "example.com" with the provided username and prompts for the password.
== 3. List All Password Entries: ==

`pwman3 list`
Displays a list of all stored password entries in the database.
== 4. Retrieve a Password: ==

`pwman3 get -s "example.com"`
Retrieves the password for the specified site, here "example.com", and displays it.
== 5. Update a Password Entry: ==

`pwman3 update -s "example.com" -u "new_username"`
Updates the username for the entry related to "example.com".
== 6. Remove a Password Entry: ==

`pwman3 remove -s "example.com"`
Deletes the entry for "example.com" from the password database.
== 7. Copy a Password to Clipboard: ==

`pwman3 copy -s "example.com"`
Copies the password for "example.com" to the clipboard for a limited time.
== 8. Search for a Password Entry: ==

`pwman3 search "keyword"`
Searches for entries containing the specified keyword in their site names or usernames.
== 9. Export Password Database: ==

`pwman3 export -f json > pwman_backup.json`
Exports the password database in JSON format to a file named "pwman_backup.json".
== 10. Import Password Database: ==

`pwman3 import -f json < pwman_backup.json`
Imports a previously exported database file ("pwman_backup.json") in JSON format into pwman3.
These commands showcase various functionalities of pwman3 for managing passwords securely via the command line interface.

``
See also:
 pwman3 Documentation
 pwman3 GitHub Repository
