= Contents =
    - [[#RSS feeds]]
        - [[#1. **Setting Up Your Local Environment**:]]
        - [[#2. **Creating the Webpage Layout**:]]
        - [[#3. **Displaying Multiple Webpages**:]]
        - [[#4. **Fetching and Displaying RSS Feeds**:]]
        - [[#5. **Styling and Customization**:]]
        - [[#6. **Testing Locally**:]]

= RSS feeds =

== 1. **Setting Up Your Local Environment**: ==
   - First, ensure you have a local web server running (such as Apache or Nginx) on your device.
   - Create a new folder for your project and place your HTML files there.

== 2. **Creating the Webpage Layout**: ==
   - Design your webpage layout. You mentioned wanting an "awesome" look, so consider using CSS frameworks like Bootstrap or Tailwind CSS.
   - Create an `index.html` file with the basic structure (HTML, head, body).

== 3. **Displaying Multiple Webpages**: ==
   - In your `index.html`, use `<iframe>` tags to embed other webpages. For example:
     ```html
     <iframe src="page1.html"></iframe>
     <iframe src="page2.html"></iframe>
     <!-- Add more iframes for other pages -->
     ```
   - Replace `"page1.html"` and `"page2.html"` with the actual paths to your local HTML files.

== 4. **Fetching and Displaying RSS Feeds**: ==
   - To display RSS feeds, you can use JavaScript. Here's a simple example using the Elfsight RSS Feed widget (which is free and customizable):
     ```html
     <!-- Add this inside your <body> tag -->
     <div id="rss-feed-widget"></div>

     <script>
       // Replace with your actual RSS feed URL
       const rssFeedUrl = 'https://example.com/rss-feed.xml';

       // Create the Elfsight RSS Feed widget
       const rssWidget = document.getElementById('rss-feed-widget');
       rssWidget.innerHTML = `
         <script type="text/javascript">
           window.onload = function() {
             new ElfsightApps({
               type: 'rss-feed',
               widgetId: 'your-widget-id',
               feedUrl: '${rssFeedUrl}',
               title: 'Latest News',
               itemsCount: 5, // Adjust as needed
               showDate: true,
               showDescription: true,
             });
           };
         </script>
       `;
     </script>
     ```
   - Replace `'https://example.com/rss-feed.xml'` with your actual RSS feed URL.
   - Customize the widget appearance by adjusting the options (e.g., `itemsCount`, `showDate`, etc.).

== 5. **Styling and Customization**: ==
   - Apply CSS styles to make your webpage visually appealing.
   - Consider using fonts, colors, and layout techniques to achieve the "awesome" look you desire.

== 6. **Testing Locally**: ==
   - Open your `index.html` in a web browser to test locally.
   - Make sure your web server is running and serving the files from your project folder.

Remember that this is just a starting point, and you can enhance and customize your webpage further based on your preferences. Have fun building your awesome local webpage! 🚀🌟

Source: Conversation with Bing, 2/14/2024
(1) How to Add RSS Feed on Any Website for Free - elfsight.com. https://elfsight.com/blog/how-to-add-rss-feed-on-any-website-for-free/.
(2) How to embed Rss feed on your website for FREE? - SociableKIT. https://www.sociablekit.com/tutorials/embed-rss-feed-website/.
(3) How To Embed RSS Feeds On HTML Website - Tagembed Support. https://tagembed.com/support/embed-rss-feeds-on-html-website/.
(4) Add RSS Feed widget to HTML website (fast and free) - Elfsight. https://elfsight.com/rss-feed-widget/html/.
