Backend (Python, Flask):

Install libraries: pip install flask requests beautifulsoup4 feedparser

Define topics and their RSS feeds: Create a dictionary like this:

Python
topics = {
    "Technology": "https://news.google.com/rss/search?q=technology",
    "Science": "https://news.google.com/rss/search?q=science",
    # Add more topics and feeds...
}
Use code with caution. Learn more
Write Flask routes:
Python
from flask import Flask, render_template, request

app = Flask(__name__)

@app.route("/")
def index():
    articles = {}
    for topic, feed_url in topics.items():
        articles[topic] = parse_rss_feed(feed_url)
    return render_template("index.html", articles=articles)

def parse_rss_feed(feed_url):
    # Use feedparser to fetch and parse RSS feed
    response = requests.get(feed_url)
    feed = feedparser.parse(response.content)
    articles = []
    for entry in feed.entries[:5]:  # Fetch only 5 entries
        articles.append({
            "title": entry.title,
            "link": entry.link,
        })
    return articles

if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run(debug=True)
Use code with caution. Learn more
Frontend (HTML/CSS):

Create an HTML template (index.html) with sections for each topic:
HTML
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
    <title>Your Website Title</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css">
</head>
<body>
    <h1>Your Website Title</h1>
    {% for topic, articles in articles.items() %}
    <h2>{{ topic }}</h2>
    <ul>
        {% for article in articles %}
        <li><a href="{{ article.link }}">{{ article.title }}</a></li>
        {% endfor %}
    </ul>
    {% endfor %}
</body>
</html>
Use code with caution. Learn more
Create a CSS file (style.css) to style your website.
Deployment:

Deploy your Flask application to a suitable web server like Apache or Nginx.

Notes:

This is a simplified example and requires further customization for a fully functional website.
Ensure responsible use of RSS feeds and respect intellectual property rights.
Consider error handling, user authentication, and other advanced features for a production-ready website.
Remember, this is just a starting point. You can build upon this foundation to create a website that meets your specific needs and aesthetic preferences. Don't hesitate to explore libraries like jinja2 for templating and Bootstrap or other CSS frameworks for styling.
