= Taskwarrior_tools =

#author:	batan
#description:	random notes

| Nu | `                      Description                    ` | `                                         URL                                  ' |
|----|---------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1  | taskopen                                                | https://github.com/jschlatow/taskopen                                            |
| 2  | task time-tracking-hook                                 | https://github.com/kostajh/taskwarrior-time-tracking-hook                        |
| 3  | taskwarrior-notifications                               | https://github.com/flickerfly/taskwarrior-notifications                          |
| 4  | in.the.am                                               | https://github.com/coddingtonbear/inthe.am                                       |
| 5  | taskwarrior-progress                                    | https://github.com/frenchrd/taskwarrior-progress                                 |
| 6  | taskwarriot_hooks                                       | https://github.com/samxsmith/taskwarrior_utils.git                               |
| 7  | mutt2tw                                                 | https://github.com/kellya/mutt2tw                                                |
| 8  | taskwarrior-expire                                      | https://github.com/tbabej/taskwarrior-tag_expire-hook.git                        |
| 9  | tw-airline-plugin                                       | https://github.com/linuxcaffe/tw-airline-plugin.git                              |
| 10 | gmailtaskadd                                            | https://github.com/theJonathanToth/gmailtaskadd                                  |
| 11 | voice-to-taskwarrior                                    | https://github.com/bergercookie/voice_to_taskwarrior.git                         |
| 12 | taskwarrior-themes                                      | https://github.com/garretpatten/taskwarrior-themes                               |
| 13 | tasknotes                                               | https://github.com/mhayden7/tasknotes.git                                        |
| 14 | tasknote                                                | https://github.com/task-note/tasknote.git                                        |
| 15 | task-dashboard                                          | https://github.com/8ware/task-dashboard.git                                      |
|    |                                                         |                                                                                  |
|    |                                                         |                                                                                  |
|    |                                                         |                                                                                  |

= 20 Taskwarrior Hooks =

== Burndown Plugin: ==
Description: Provides burndown charts for your Taskwarrior tasks.

== Gantt Plugin: ==
Description: Allows the generation of Gantt charts based on your Taskwarrior tasks.

== Kanban Plugin: ==
Description: Implements a Kanban-style board for Taskwarrior tasks.

== Timewarrior Integration: ==
Description: Integrates Timewarrior time tracking with Taskwarrior.

== Taskopen Hook: ==
Description: Opens task details in your preferred text editor when using task open.

== Taskjournal Hook: ==
Description: Adds journal entries to tasks, providing a way to log additional details.

== Taskd Server Hooks: ==
Description: Custom hooks for Taskd server events, enhancing server functionality.

== Task Slack Integration: ==
Description: Integrates Taskwarrior with Slack for task updates and notifications.

== Task Git Integration: ==
Description: Tracks changes in your Taskwarrior tasks using Git.

== Task Sync Hooks: ==
Description: Custom hooks for syncing Taskwarrior tasks across multiple devices.

== Taskw Autoarchive Hook: ==
Description: Automates the archiving of completed tasks.

== Taskw Sync: ==
Description: A sync plugin for Taskwarrior, allowing synchronization between instances.

== Taskw Update Hook: ==
Description: Automatically updates the due date of recurring tasks.

== Taskw Stats: ==
Description: Provides additional statistical insights into your task data.

== Task Trello Sync: ==
Description: Syncs Taskwarrior tasks with Trello boards.

== Taskwarrior Pomodoro: ==
Description: Implements Pomodoro technique timers for Taskwarrior tasks.

== Task Wiki Linking: ==
Description: Adds wiki-style linking between tasks.

== Task Time Tracking: ==
Description: Enhances Taskwarrior with time tracking capabilities.

== Taskwarrior Habitica: ==
Description: Integrates Taskwarrior tasks with the Habitica productivity game.

== Taskwarrior Colors: ==
Description: Customizes the colors used in the Taskwarrior interface.

Before installing any plugin or hook, ensure it is compatible with your Taskwarrior version and review the documentation for installation instructions and usage details.





= Vimwiki, a personal wiki for Vim, has a vibrant ecosystem of plugins and hooks that enhance its functionality. Here are 20 Vimwiki hooks or plugins: =

== Vimwiki-Tasks: ==
Description: Adds task management features to Vimwiki, allowing you to manage to-do lists and tasks.

== Vimwiki Calendar: ==
Description: Integrates a calendar view into Vimwiki, enhancing date-based navigation.

== Vimwiki Math: ==
Description: Enables mathematical notation support within Vimwiki for documenting equations.

== Vimwiki Diary: ==
Description: Extends Vimwiki with a diary functionality for journaling and logging.

== Vimwiki Syntax Highlighting: ==
Description: Enhances Vimwiki by adding syntax highlighting for various file types.

== Vimwiki Tagging: ==
Description: Implements tagging functionality in Vimwiki, facilitating organization and categorization.

== Vimwiki PlantUML: ==
Description: Integrates PlantUML support into Vimwiki for creating UML diagrams.

== Vimwiki Git: ==
Description: Enables version control integration with Git for Vimwiki files.

== Vimwiki Bookmarks: ==
Description: Adds bookmarking features to Vimwiki for easy navigation.

== Vimwiki Snippets: ==
Description: Allows the use of snippets within Vimwiki for faster content creation.

== Vimwiki Table of Contents: ==
Description: Automatically generates and maintains a table of contents for your Vimwiki.

== Vimwiki Dropbox Sync: ==
Description: Facilitates synchronization of Vimwiki files with Dropbox.

== Vimwiki Calendar Sync: ==
Description: Syncs Vimwiki calendar entries with external calendar applications.

== Vimwiki Live Preview: ==
Description: Provides live preview functionality for Vimwiki files.

== Vimwiki Task Warrior Integration: ==
Description: Integrates Vimwiki with Taskwarrior, a task management tool.

== Vimwiki Todoist Sync: ==
Description: Syncs Vimwiki tasks with Todoist for cross-platform task management.

== Vimwiki FZF Integration: ==
Description: Integrates FZF (fuzzy finder) with Vimwiki for efficient searching and navigation.

== Vimwiki Pandoc Integration: ==
Description: Integrates Pandoc with Vimwiki for exporting Vimwiki pages to various formats.

== Vimwiki Blog: ==
Description: Turns Vimwiki into a simple static blog generator.

== Vimwiki Spell Checking: ==
Description: Adds spell-checking support to Vimwiki for improved text accuracy.
