= Contents =
        - [[#Top Pi-Hole Alternatives]]
                                - [[#AdGuard Home:]]
                                - [[#pfBlockerNG:]]
                                - [[#DNSCrypt-Proxy:]]
                                - [[#HostsBlock:]]
                                - [[#dnsmasq:]]
                                - [[#AdBlock:]]
                                - [[#Energized Protection:]]
                                - [[#Privoxy:]]
                                - [[#AdAway:]]
                                - [[#Blocky:]]

= Top Pi-Hole Alternatives =

Pi-hole is a popular open-source network-level ad blocker and DNS sinkhole that runs on a Raspberry Pi or other compatible devices. If you're looking for alternatives to Pi-hole, here are some open-source alternatives that offer similar functionality:

==== AdGuard Home: ==== 
AdGuard Home is an open-source ad blocker and DNS server that can be used to block ads, trackers, and malicious websites at the network level. It offers a user-friendly web interface for configuration.

==== pfBlockerNG: ==== 
pfBlockerNG is a package for the pfSense firewall that provides ad blocking and DNS filtering capabilities. It can be used to block ads and malicious domains.

==== DNSCrypt-Proxy: ==== 
DNSCrypt-Proxy is a tool that encrypts DNS traffic between your device and a DNS resolver, adding a layer of security and privacy to your DNS queries. While it doesn't block ads by default, you can pair it with blocklists or filtering rules to achieve similar functionality.

==== HostsBlock: ==== 
HostsBlock is a bash script that downloads and manages various hosts files to block ads, trackers, and malware. It can be used in conjunction with your DNS resolver of choice.

==== dnsmasq: ==== 
Dnsmasq is a lightweight DNS server and DHCP server that can be configured to block ads and filter DNS queries. While it's not as feature-rich as Pi-hole, it can be a good choice for more advanced users who want more control over their DNS filtering.

==== AdBlock: ==== 
AdBlock is an open-source DNS sinkhole and ad blocker that can run on various platforms, including Linux and Windows. It provides an easy-to-use web interface for configuration.

==== Energized Protection: ==== 
Energized Protection is a collection of ad and malware blocking hosts files that can be used with DNS filtering tools like dnsmasq, unbound, or other DNS servers.

==== Privoxy: ==== 
Privoxy is a web proxy with filtering capabilities that can be used to block ads and other unwanted content. It works by intercepting and filtering HTTP traffic.

==== AdAway: ==== 
AdAway is an open-source ad blocker for Android devices. While it's not a network-level ad blocker like Pi-hole, it can be an effective way to block ads on mobile devices.

==== Blocky: ==== 
Blocky is an open-source, self-hosted DNS filter and ad blocker that provides an easy-to-use web interface for configuration.

These alternatives offer various features and levels of complexity, so you can choose the one that best suits your needs and technical expertise. Whether you want a straightforward ad blocker or a more advanced DNS filtering solution, there are open-source options available to help you improve your online privacy and security.
