= Contents =
    - [[#User Resources]]
        - [[#Introduction]]
        - [[#Useful Extensions]]
        - [[#Disable JIT]]
        - [[#Disable WebAssembly]]
        - [[#Disable Weak SSL Cipher Suites]]
        - [[#Disable Media Router]]
        - [[#Linux]]

= User Resources =

== Introduction ==

   This page collects information about extensions and options for
   Chromium that may be useful for users.

   Please submit a [14]PR to ungoogled-chromium-wiki if you want to
   contribute.

== Useful Extensions ==

   TODO: bulleted list of extensions, each with a short explanation of
   their purpose, benefits, and potential drawbacks
     * [15]chromium-web-store - Check and/or install updates to CRX-based
       extensions (i.e. not exclusively from the Chrome Web Store). It
       supports optional automatic updates. This is an extension-based
       implementation of [16]Issue #285.

== Disable JIT ==

   The [17]JIT optimization of JavaScript is a [18]known attack vector. It
   can be disabled with the launch flag --js-flags='--jitless'.

   JavaScript will still run with JIT disabled, but websites may be
   slower, especially script-heavy apps like Google Maps. Disabling JIT
   also disables WebAssembly.

== Disable WebAssembly ==

   (Suggested in [19]#578)

   Like JavaScript, WebAssembly is another potential attack vector. See
   [20]#578 for the details of exploiting WebAssembly.

   See [21]stevenspringett/disable-webassembly for instructions on
   disabling WebAssembly.

== Disable Weak SSL Cipher Suites ==

   Disable weak SSL cipher suites to prevent usage in SSL-encrypted
   traffic like HTTPS.

   The command-line flag is --cipher-suite-blacklist, with a
   comma-delimited list of cipher suites in hexadecimal. There must be
   exactly four hexadecimal digits per cipher suite. Example:
chromium --cipher-suite-blacklist=0x000a,0x009c,0x009d,0x002f,0x0035

== Disable Media Router ==

   Disabling Media Router prevents the browser from sending UDP
   broadcasts. (NOTE: Broadcasts happen even if the media router extension
   is disabled). This can be achieved by setting the policies:

   == Linux ==

   Create or add the following JSON content to
   /etc/chromium/policies/managed/policies.json:
{
  "EnableMediaRouter": false
}

   Here is an example of policies.json with more configuration settings:
{
  "EnableMediaRouter": false,
  "DefaultWebUsbGuardSetting": 2,
  "DefaultWebBluetoothGuardSetting": 2,
  "HomepageLocation": "http://site.com",
  "NativeMessagingUserLevelHosts": false,
  "WPADQuickCheckEnabled": false,
  "BackgroundModeEnabled": false
}

