<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><feed xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2005/Atom" xmlns:media="http://search.yahoo.com/mrss/"><category term=" reddit.com" label="r/ reddit.com"/><updated>2023-08-27T00:06:19+00:00</updated><id>/message/unread/.rss?feed=e9b25c07ed6a6a79c7839a4f343825b69838aabd&amp;user=bpbatan</id><link rel="self" href="https://www.reddit.com/message/unread/.rss?feed=e9b25c07ed6a6a79c7839a4f343825b69838aabd&amp;user=bpbatan" type="application/atom+xml" /><link rel="alternate" href="https://www.reddit.com/message/unread/?feed=e9b25c07ed6a6a79c7839a4f343825b69838aabd&amp;user=bpbatan" type="text/html" /><title>messages: unread</title><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 2 months ago: Welcome to r/learnprogramming! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Welcome to &lt;a href=&quot;/r/learnprogramming&quot;&gt;/r/learnprogramming&lt;/a&gt;!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Before posting or commenting, please be sure to:&lt;/p&gt; &lt;ol&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;p&gt;Read our &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/comments/61oly8/new_read_me_first/&quot;&gt;New? READ ME FIRST!&lt;/a&gt; stickied post.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;p&gt;Read our &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/about/rules&quot;&gt;subreddit rules&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;p&gt;Make sure your question or post is &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/index#wiki_allowed_topics&quot;&gt;on-topic&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;/ol&gt; &lt;p&gt;In addition, if you&amp;#39;re here to:&lt;/p&gt; &lt;ol&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;Ask a question&lt;/strong&gt;, start by checking to see if your question is &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/faq&quot;&gt;already answered in the FAQ&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;For example, if you want to learn where to start learning how to program, see &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/faq#wiki_getting_started&quot;&gt;FAQ - Getting started&lt;/a&gt; and &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/faq#wiki_where_do_i_find_good_learning_resources.3F&quot;&gt;FAQ - Where do I find good learning resources?&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;If you&amp;#39;re unable to view the wiki, try visiting the page from a desktop browser, enabling desktop mode on your phone&amp;#39;s web browser, or changing the start of the url to begin with &lt;code&gt;old.reddit.com&lt;/code&gt; instead of &lt;code&gt;reddit.com&lt;/code&gt;. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Also be sure to read our guidelines on &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/index#wiki_asking_questions&quot;&gt;how to ask a question&lt;/a&gt; to learn more about how to write a strong technical question and increase your chances of getting an answer.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;Get feedback on some code you&amp;#39;ve written&lt;/strong&gt;, start by reading our &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/index#wiki_sharing_a_project&quot;&gt;guidelines on sharing a project&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;Help answer questions&lt;/strong&gt;, start by reading our &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/index#wiki_offering_help&quot;&gt;guidelines on offering help&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;li&gt;&lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;Share an educational resource you&amp;#39;ve made&lt;/strong&gt;, start by first participating in our community by answering some questions or giving feedback in our weekly &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/search?q=%22What+have+you+been+working+on+recently%3F%22&amp;amp;sort=new&amp;amp;restrict_sr=on&quot;&gt;&amp;quot;What have you been working on?&amp;quot; threads&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Once you&amp;#39;ve spent some time directly participating, read our &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/wiki/index#wiki_self-promotion&quot;&gt;policies on self-promotion&lt;/a&gt; to learn about our expectations regarding educational resources.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;/li&gt; &lt;/ol&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/learnprogramming&quot;&gt;r/learnprogramming&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/learnprogramming&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1vmy0un&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1vmy0un</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1vmy0un"/><updated>2023-06-08T11:35:27+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 2 months ago: Welcome to r/learnprogramming!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 2 months ago: Welcome to r/learnprogramming!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/linuxmasterrace! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Hello and welcome to &lt;a href=&quot;/r/linuxmasterrace&quot;&gt;/r/linuxmasterrace&lt;/a&gt;, a subreddit for fun discussion of Linux and FOSS!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;We have an IRC channel located here: &lt;a href=&quot;https://kiwiirc.com/nextclient/irc.snoonet.org/#linuxmasterrace&quot;&gt;https://kiwiirc.com/nextclient/irc.snoonet.org/#linuxmasterrace&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Alternatively with an IRC client: &lt;code&gt;irc.snoonet.org&lt;/code&gt; (port 6667/6697 for SSL) &lt;code&gt;#linuxmasterrace&lt;/code&gt;&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;If you have any questions, don&amp;#39;t hesitate to ask. &lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Cheers, &lt;a href=&quot;/r/linuxmasterrace&quot;&gt;/r/linuxmasterrace&lt;/a&gt; team.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/linuxmasterrace&quot;&gt;r/linuxmasterrace&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/linuxmasterrace&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1soaiut&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1soaiut</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1soaiut"/><updated>2023-04-12T04:16:36+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/linuxmasterrace!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/linuxmasterrace!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/termux! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;Thank you for joining &lt;a href=&quot;/r/termux&quot;&gt;/r/termux&lt;/a&gt;!&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;We are a technical community of enthusiasts who uses Termux, a terminal emulator and Linux user space for Android OS. Feel free here to share interesting use cases, scripts, configuration or help others to troubleshoot issues.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;Termux developers are moderators there. Be respectful and follow the community rules. Please don&amp;#39;t use this subreddit for reporting bugs as they wouldn&amp;#39;t be tracked.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/termux&quot;&gt;r/termux&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/termux&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1soadnh&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1soadnh</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1soadnh"/><updated>2023-04-12T04:16:01+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/termux!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/termux!</title></entry><entry><author><name>/u/welcomebot</name><uri>https://www.reddit.com/user/welcomebot</uri></author><content type="html">&lt;div&gt; from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/linuxmemes! &lt;/div&gt; &lt;!-- SC_OFF --&gt;&lt;div class=&quot;md&quot;&gt;&lt;p&gt;You&amp;#39;ve subscribed to the worst subreddit on reddit. The penguins are clapping. They have waited their whole lives for your arrival. Set your sanity aside for it&amp;#39;s the wrong tool for the job.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;hr/&gt; &lt;p&gt;This message can not be replied to. If you have questions for the moderators of &lt;a href=&quot;/r/linuxmemes&quot;&gt;r/linuxmemes&lt;/a&gt; you can message them &lt;a href=&quot;https://reddit.com/message/compose?to=r/linuxmemes&quot;&gt;here&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;/div&gt;&lt;!-- SC_ON --&gt; &lt;div&gt; &lt;a href=&quot;https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1soad7i&quot;&gt;[full conversation]&lt;/a&gt; &lt;/div&gt;</content><id>t4_1soad7i</id><link href="https://www.reddit.com/message/messages/1soad7i"/><updated>2023-04-12T04:15:58+00:00</updated><summary type="html">from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/linuxmemes!</summary><title>from welcomebot sent 4 months ago: Welcome to r/linuxmemes!</title></entry></feed>
