= Contents =
        - [[#Xfce Desktop On Alpine OS]]
                        - [[#Update Alpine Linux:]]
                        - [[#Install XFCE:]]
                        - [[#Install Display Manager (Optional):]]
                        - [[#Enable the Display Manager:]]
                        - [[#Reboot your System:]]
                        - [[#Log In to XFCE:]]

= Xfce Desktop On Alpine OS =

_To install the XFCE desktop environment on a fresh install of Alpine Linux, you can follow these steps:_

=== Update Alpine Linux: ===
_Before you begin, it's a good practice to update the package list and upgrade any existing 
packages on your system. Open a terminal and run the following commands as the root user or with sudo:_

`    sh

sudo apk update
sudo apk upgrade
`
=== Install XFCE: ===
_XFCE is available as a package in the Alpine Linux repositories. You can install it using the apk package manager. Run the following command:_
`
sh

sudo apk add xfce4 xfce4-terminal
`
This command will install the XFCE desktop environment and the XFCE terminal emulator.

=== Install Display Manager (Optional): ===
_If you want to use a display manager to log in to your XFCE session, you can install one. A popular choice is LightDM. Install it using:_
`
sh

sudo apk add lightdm lightdm-gtk-greeter
`
=== Enable the Display Manager: ===
_To enable the display manager to start automatically when you boot your system, you can use the following commands:_
`
sh

sudo rc-update add lightdm default
sudo rc-service lightdm start
`
Replace "lightdm" with the name of your chosen display manager if you installed a different one.

=== Reboot your System: ===
_After completing the installation and configuration, it's a good idea to reboot your system to ensure that the XFCE desktop environment starts correctly:_
`
sh

    sudo reboot
`
=== Log In to XFCE: ===

After your system reboots, you should see the display manager (e.g., LightDM) prompting you to log in.
Select your username and provide your password to log in to the XFCE desktop environment.
You should now have the XFCE desktop environment up and running on your Alpine Linux system. You can customize 
your XFCE desktop to your liking and install additional software as needed.
