  1. Update System: Run  apk update  to update the package repositories.
  2. Upgrade Packages: Upgrade installed packages with  apk upgrade  to get the latest versions.
  3. Set Hostname: Use  hostnamectl set-hostname hostname  to set the system's hostname.
  4. Configure Timezone: Set the system's timezone with  apk add tzdata  followed by  setup-timezone .
  5. Create User: Add a new user with  adduser username  and follow the prompts to set up the user.
  6. Grant Sudo Access: Enable the new user to have administrative privileges with  adduser username sudo .
  7. Configure Network: Edit  /etc/network/interfaces  to set up network interfaces.
  8. Configure DNS: Edit  /etc/resolv.conf  to specify DNS servers.
  9. Set Static IP: Set a static IP address by editing  /etc/network/interfaces  and specifying the IP
  configuration.
  10. Install Additional Software: Use  apk add package_name  to install desired packages.
  11. Enable SSH: Install and enable OpenSSH with  apk add openssh  and start the service with  rc-service sshd
  start .
  12. Enable Firewall: Install and enable a firewall like iptables or nftables, then configure rules as needed.
  13. Configure NTP: Install and configure NTP (Network Time Protocol) to synchronize system time.
  14. Configure Log Rotation: Set up log rotation to manage log files and prevent disk space issues.
  15. Install Development Tools: Install packages like gcc, make, and git for software development.
  16. Install Database: Install and configure a database server such as MySQL or PostgreSQL.
  17. Set Password Policies: Configure password policies in  /etc/login.defs  to enforce strong passwords.
  18. Enable Disk Encryption: Use LUKS (Linux Unified Key Setup) to encrypt disks for enhanced data security.
  19. Configure File Sharing: Set up file sharing using Samba, NFS, or other protocols.
  20. Configure DNS Server: Set up a DNS server using packages like BIND or Unbound.
  21. Configure Web Server: Install and configure a web server like Nginx or Apache.
  22. Configure FTP Server: Install and configure an FTP server such as vsftpd or proftpd.
  23. Configure Email Server: Install and configure an email server using packages like Postfix, Dovecot, or Exim.
  24. Configure SSH Hardening: Edit  /etc/ssh/sshd_config  to enhance SSH security by disabling root login or
  changing default port.
  25. Set File Permissions: Review and adjust file permissions using  chmod  and  chown  commands.
  26. Enable Swap: Create and enable a swap file or partition to improve system performance.
  27. Configure System Monitoring: Install monitoring tools like Monit or Netdata for system health monitoring.
  28. Set Up Cron jobs: Create scheduled tasks using  crontab -e  to automate repetitive tasks.
  29. Configure SELinux/AppArmor: Install and configure SELinux or AppArmor for enhanced security policies.
  30. Configure Backup: Set up backup solutions like rsync, BorgBackup, or cloud-based services.
  31. Install SSL/TLS Certificates: Obtain and install SSL certificates for secure connections.
  32. Set Up System Logging: Configure centralized logging using syslog or a log aggregation service.
  33. Set Up a VPN: Install and configure a VPN server like OpenVPN or WireGuard for secure remote access.
  34. Configure System Updates: Set up automatic updates using  crontab  or tools like apk-cron.
  35. Configure IPv6: Enable and configure IPv6 by editing  /etc/network/interfaces  and adding IPv6 addresses.
  36. Configure DNSSEC: Enable DNSSEC (Domain Name System Security Extensions) for DNS authentication and
  integrity.
  37. Install Web Application Firewall: Set up a web application firewall like ModSecurity to protect web
  applications.
  38. Harden Kernel Security: Apply kernel hardening techniques like disabling unnecessary features and enabling
Alpine 20 postinstall
  security options.
  39. Configure SMTP Relay: Set up an SMTP relay server to relay outgoing emails through a trusted provider.
  40. Install Monitoring Agents: Install monitoring agents like Prometheus or Zabbix to monitor system performance.
  41. Configure Two-Factor Authentication: Set up two-factor authentication (2FA) for additional user security.
  42. Configure Intrusion Detection System: Install an IDS like Snort or Suricata to detect and prevent network
  attacks.
  43. Configure Load Balancer: Install and configure a load balancer like HAProxy or Nginx for high availability.
  44. Configure Database Backups: Set up regular backups for databases using tools like mysqldump or pg_dump.
  45. Configure Containerization: Install and configure containerization platforms like Docker or Podman.
  46. Configure Virtualization: Set up a hypervisor like KVM or Xen to host virtual machines.
  47. Configure Web Application Deployment: Deploy web applications using tools like Docker Compose or Kubernetes.
  48. Configure SSH Key Authentication: Set up SSH key-based authentication for secure remote access.
  49. Enable
