= Alpine_Dual_Monitor =

Configuring dual monitors in Alpine OS with HDMI on the left can be accomplished using xrandr for X11-based setups. Follow these steps:
Step 1: Install Required Packages

Ensure you have xrandr installed. You might also need xf86-video-intel or other drivers depending on your hardware.


<code>sudo apk add xrandr xf86-video-intel</code>

Step 2: Identify Connected Monitors

Run the following command to list all connected monitors and their names:


<code>xrandr
</code>

You'll get an output similar to this:

<code>
Screen 0: minimum 8 x 8, current 1920 x 1080, maximum 16384 x 16384
HDMI-1 connected 1920x1080+0+0 (normal left inverted right x axis y axis) 476mm x 268mm
eDP-1 connected primary 1366x768+1920+0 (normal left inverted right x axis y axis) 309mm x 174mm
</code>

In this example:

    <code>    HDMI-1 is the external monitor.
	    eDP-1 is the laptop screen (internal monitor).
		</code>

Step 3: Configure Dual Monitors

To configure the external monitor (HDMI) to the left of the internal monitor, use the following command:


<code>xrandr --output HDMI-1 --auto --left-of eDP-1
</code>

Step 4: Make the Configuration Persistent

To make these settings persistent across reboots, add the xrandr command to your X11 startup script. This is typically done in ~/.xinitrc or ~/.xprofile.

Edit (or create) ~/.xprofile:


<code>nano ~/.xprofile
</code>

Add the following line:


<code>xrandr --output HDMI-1 --auto --left-of eDP-1
</code>

Step 5: Restart X11

Restart your X session or reboot your system to apply the changes.
Optional: Configure xorg.conf

If you prefer to configure this in xorg.conf for more control or advanced settings, you can do so:

    Create or edit /etc/X11/xorg.conf.d/10-monitor.conf:


<code>sudo nano /etc/X11/xorg.conf.d/10-monitor.conf
</code>

    Add the following configuration:

<code>
    Section "Monitor"
    Identifier "HDMI-1"
    Option "Position" "0 0"
	EndSection

	Section "Monitor"
    Identifier "eDP-1"
    Option "RightOf" "HDMI-1"
	EndSection

	Section "Screen"
    Identifier "Screen0"
    Device "Intel Graphics"
    Monitor "HDMI-1"
    SubSection "Display"
    Modes "1920x1080"
    EndSubSection
    Monitor "eDP-1"
    SubSection "Display"
    Modes "1366x768"
    EndSubSection
	EndSection
</code>

Replace "Intel Graphics" with the appropriate device identifier if using a different driver.
Verification

After configuring, you can verify the settings by running xrandr again to ensure both monitors are set up correctly.
Troubleshooting

    Ensure your hardware drivers are correctly installed.
    Check /var/log/Xorg.0.log for any errors related to monitor configuration.
