= Contents =
        - [[#The 30 Best VSCode Shortcuts To Boost Productivity in 2023]]
        - [[#30 Best VSCode Shortcuts to Boost Productivity in 2023]]
                - [[#1. Zen Mode]]
                - [[#2. Command Palette]]
                - [[#3. Global Find]]
                - [[#4. Move a Line Up/Down]]
                - [[#5. Multi-Select Cursor]]
                - [[#6. Delete a Line]]
                - [[#7. Comment Code]]
                - [[#8. Toggle the Sidebar]]
                - [[#9. Split View]]
                - [[#10. Copy a Line Up/Down]]
                - [[#11. Navigate to a Specific Line]]
                - [[#12. Open Settings]]
                - [[#13. Trim Trailing Whitespace]]
                - [[#14. Select the Current Line]]
                - [[#15. Open the Markdown preview]]
                - [[#16. Fold/Unfold Code Block]]
                - [[#17. Show References]]
                - [[#18. Trigger Suggestion/Parameter Hints]]
                - [[#19. Show All Symbols]]
                - [[#20. Go Back/Move Forward]]
                - [[#21. Show Integrated terminal]]
                - [[#22. Zoom In/Out]]
                - [[#23. Show Extensions]]
                - [[#24. Show Search Bar]]
                - [[#25. Quick Open]]
                - [[#26. Create New File]]
                - [[#27. Toggle Full Screen]]
                - [[#28. Renaming Symbols]]
                - [[#29. Indent/Outdent Lines]]
                - [[#30. Show Output Panel]]
                - [[#Best Practices for Finding & Using Shortcuts in VSCode]]



= The 30 Best VSCode Shortcuts To Boost Productivity in 2023 =
= 30 Best VSCode Shortcuts to Boost Productivity in 2023 =

== 1. Zen Mode ==


Main feature: Enter distraction-free mode

Mac command: Cmd + K, Z

Windows command: Ctrl + K, Z

This allows you to enter full-screen mode, which is ideal for focusing solely
on the code you're working on. The interface is minimalistic, and all
extraneous elements are hidden, providing a distraction-free environment. To
exit, double-click escape.

== 2. Command Palette ==


Main feature: Show all commands

Mac command: Cmd + Shift + P

Windows command: Ctrl + Shift + P

This will bring up a search bar where you can search for any command or feature
you need, eliminating the need to navigate through various menus and settings,
as it offers access to all VS Code commands and features from a single
location.

== 3. Global Find ==


Main feature: Search within all files

Mac command: Cmd + Shift + F

Windows command: Ctrl + Shift + F

Use this to search for specific text or code within your current file, which is
ideal when you're trying to find a particular function or variable in multiple
places. It highlights all instances of your search text, allowing you to easily
navigate to each.

== 4. Move a Line Up/Down ==


Main feature: Move a line up or down

Mac command: Option + Up/Down arrow

Windows command: Alt + Up/Down arrow

This shortcut makes it easy to move a block of code to a different location in
the file without having to cut and paste. This is especially useful when you're
editing large files with many lines of code.

== 5. Multi-Select Cursor ==


Main feature: At cursor at multiple places

Mac command: Option + Click

Windows command: Alt + Click

You can use this shortcut to place multiple cursors in different locations in a
file. This feature can save you time by enabling you to simultaneously make
identical changes in different places.

== 6. Delete a Line ==


Main feature: Delete a line quickly

Mac command: Cmd + Shift + K

Windows command: Ctrl + Shift + K

This simple but essential feature lets you remove a line of code quickly
without selecting it manually or cutting it with the mouse. It can come in
handy when you're refactoring code.

== 7. Comment Code ==


Main feature: Comment single or multi lines of code

Mac command: Cmd + /

Windows command: Ctrl + /

Using this shortcut, you can add comments to your code quickly and with ease.
Whether you’re improving documentation, debugging, or want to temporarily
disable a block of code, you can use it to comment out a single line or
multiple lines of code.

== 8. Toggle the Sidebar ==


Main feature: Make the sidebar appear or disappear

Mac command: Cmd + B

Windows command: Ctrl + B

When you want to hide or show the sidebar in the editor, this is a shortcut you
can use. It’s useful when you need more screen real estate or want to reduce
the clutter in the editor.

== 9. Split View ==


Main feature: View files side by side

Mac command: Cmd + \

Windows command: Ctrl + \

This shortcut allows you to split the editor pane into two parts, allowing you
to view two different files side by side. You can use this when you're
comparing two files or referencing one file while working on another.

== 10. Copy a Line Up/Down ==


Main feature: Duplicate a line

Mac command: Option + Shift + Up/Down arrow

Windows command: Alt + Shift + Up/Down arrow

You can use this shortcut when you want to duplicate a line of code quickly. It
makes it easy to create repetitive code blocks or copy and paste blocks of code
without manually selecting them.

== 11. Navigate to a Specific Line ==

Main feature: Takes you to a specified line

Mac command: Ctrl + G

Windows command: Ctrl + G

With this VSCode go to line shortcut, you can jump to a specific line in the
current file. The command opens a dialog box where you can enter the line
number you want to navigate to.

== 12. Open Settings ==

Main feature:

Mac command: Cmd + ,

Windows command: Ctrl + ,

Do you want to open the settings panel in VS Code? The quickest way to do so is
to use this shortcut, simply click CTRL (for Windows) or CMD for Mac) with the
comma (,) key.

== 13. Trim Trailing Whitespace ==

Main feature: Remove unwanted whitespace

Mac command: Cmd + K Cmd + X

Windows command: Ctrl + K Ctrl + X

If you want to remove trailing whitespace from the end of lines in your code,
this shortcut will be useful. Using the feature can help improve your code's
readability and avoid unnecessary changes in version control systems.

== 14. Select the Current Line ==

Main feature: Select everything on the current line

Mac command: Cmd + L

Windows command: Ctrl + L

Use this shortcut when you want to select a piece of text or code on a line.
This feature will select the entire line the cursor is currently on. With this,
you don’t need to manually highlight the line with the mouse.

== 15. Open the Markdown preview ==

Main feature: Preview a markdown document

Mac command: Shift + Cmd + V

Windows command: Shift + Ctrl + V

This VS Code shortcut lets you preview your Markdown files in a separate pane.
This feature can be useful when you're writing documentation or other
text-based content using Markdown, such as ReadMe files.

== 16. Fold/Unfold Code Block ==

Main feature: Collapse or expand code block

Mac commands: Option + Cmd + [ to fold | Option + Cmd + ] to unfold

Windows commands: Ctrl + Shift + [ to fold | Ctrl + Shift + ] to unfold

When working with long files or files containing large blocks of code, you will
sometimes want to collapse and expand code blocks. That’s when this shortcut
comes in handy.

== 17. Show References ==

Main feature: Quickly find reference to a symbol

Mac command: Cmd + Shift + click

Windows command: Shift + F12

To use this shortcut, first, place your cursor on the symbol you want to find
references for, then press the shortcut key combination. This will open a panel
with a list of all the references to that symbol in your project.

== 18. Trigger Suggestion/Parameter Hints ==

Main feature: Show auto-complete suggestions

Mac command: Cmd + Shift + Space

Windows command: Ctrl + Shift + Space

This triggers code completion suggestions and parameter hints for the current
code context. This feature can help speed up your workflow.

== 19. Show All Symbols ==

Main feature: Show all symbols in the current file

Mac command: Cmd + T

Windows command: Ctrl + T

This shortcut lets you see a list of the current file's symbols (functions,
classes, etc.). This feature can help you navigate large files quickly.

== 20. Go Back/Move Forward ==

Main feature: Navigate forward/backward

Mac command: Ctrl - or Ctrl + UpArrow -

Windows command: Alt + Left/Right Arrow

Navigate through your code history and jump between previous cursor positions
in the file with this go-back/move-forward shortcut. It’s a useful shortcut
when you need to quickly retrace your steps or switch between different parts
of your code.

== 21. Show Integrated terminal ==

Main feature: Toggle integrated terminal

Mac command: Ctrl + `

Windows command: Ctrl + `

The shortcut allows you to use the integrated Terminal in VS Code. It allows
developers to run commands on the terminal without leaving VS Code.

== 22. Zoom In/Out ==

Main feature: Zoom in and out of the current file

Mac command: Cmd + =/Minus

Windows command: Ctrl + =/Minus

Zooming is a useful VS Code shortcut when you need to view your code more
closely or when you need to adjust the font size to improve readability.

== 23. Show Extensions ==

Main feature: Toggle extensions panel

Mac command: Shift + Cmd + X

Windows command: Shift + Ctrl + X

If you want to see the extensions you have in your VS Code, you can use this
shortcut, as it will toggle the extensions panel. By default, this panel
appears on the left to display all the extensions you’ve installed in VS Code.

== 24. Show Search Bar ==

Main feature: Toggle the search bar

Mac command: Cmd + F

Windows command: Ctrl + F

Use this shortcut to open the search bar in VS Code. This feature is useful
when searching for specific content within a file or across multiple files in
your project.

== 25. Quick Open ==

Main feature: Open a specific file

Mac command: Cmd + P

Windows command: Ctrl + P

You can use this shortcut to navigate to a specific file in your project. It
opens a dialog box to search for files by name or browse the file hierarchy. It
can come in handy when working on large projects with many files.

== 26. Create New File ==

Main feature: Quickly create new files

Mac command: Cmd + N

Windows command: Ctrl + N

This opens a new, untitled file in the editor, which you can then save and name
appropriately. It’s useful because it eliminates the need to navigate through
the file explorer anytime you want to create a new file.

== 27. Toggle Full Screen ==

Main feature: Enable and disable full-screen mode

Mac command: Ctrl + Cmd + F

Windows command: F11

When you want to maximize your workspace and remove distractions, using the
full-screen mode is a feature that comes in handy. It’s also useful for times
when you are working on a device with a smaller screen.

== 28. Renaming Symbols ==

Main feature: Rename all instances of a symbol

Mac command: F2

Windows command: F2

This shortcut lets you rename all occurrences of a symbol (variable, function,
class, etc.) in your project. This feature is useful, especially when you need
to refactor code and consistently change all instances of a symbol.

== 29. Indent/Outdent Lines ==

Main feature: Properly indent lines of code

Mac commands: Cmd + ] to indent | Cmd + [ to outdent

Windows commands: Ctrl + ] to indent | Ctrl + [ to outdent

Every now and then, you will need to indent or outdent a piece of text or code.
First, select the lines that you want to indent/outdent. Then click CMD (Mac)
or CTRL(Window) and the closing square bracket `]` button.

== 30. Show Output Panel ==

Main feature: Display the output panel

Mac command: Shift + Cmd + U

Windows command: Shift + Ctrl + U

This shortcut allows you to open the Output panel in your VS Code. That way,
you can view the output of running programs or other system messages the editor
generates.

== Best Practices for Finding & Using Shortcuts in VSCode ==

  • Use the Command Palette: A powerful tool in VS Code that allows you to
    search for and execute commands using shortcuts. To access this, press
    Ctrl+Shift+P (Windows, Linux) or Cmd+Shift+P (Mac) and start typing the
    command you want to execute.
  • Customize shortcuts to fit your workflow: If you use certain commands
    frequently, consider customizing keyboard shortcuts to fit your workflow.
    Go to "File > Preferences > Keyboard Shortcuts" (Windows) or "Code >
    Preferences > Keyboard Shortcuts" (Mac) and search for the command you want
    to customize. Click the pencil icon next to the command and enter a
    keyboard shortcut.
  • Practice: Learning shortcuts takes practice and repetition. Make an effort
    to use shortcuts often and over time to develop muscle memory.
  • Share shortcuts with your team: If you work in a team, sharing shortcuts
    with colleagues can improve collw3m: Can't load dump.
aboration and make coding easier.
