                   On the “Politicization” of Greek Church Discourse                    153




               Politics and Religion:
              On the “Politicization” of
              Greek Church Discourse
                               Yannis Stavrakakis


                                       Abstract

     The recent exclusion of the reference to religion from Greek identity cards has
     triggered an extraordinary reaction on behalf of the Orthodox Church. The
     Church hierarchy and Archbishop Christodoulos have led a campaign to
     oppose this decision, articulating a discourse that, by many accounts, was
     marked by a clear political profile. This reaction has polarized Greek society
     and has been dominating political life and media coverage for most of 2000
     and 2001. These developments have also become the object of numerous
     analyses and academic discussions. Although a variety of dimensions are at
     stake, there is no doubt that the first crucial issue posed by the events is the
     question of the “politicization” of religious discourse. Is contemporary Greek
     Church discourse politicized? How can we account for this politicization
     within current global trends and the Greek historical context? These are some
     of the challenging questions explored in this paper.

In April 2000, after his second consecutive victory in the general
elections, Greek prime minister Costas Simitis appointed his new govern-
ment. In a move far from typical for Greek political life, he appointed as
minister of justice a non-parliamentarian, a university professor of law,
Michalis Stathopoulos. On 6 May 2000, the newly appointed minister
aired, in an interview, a series of reforms aimed at modernizing the
Greek legal apparatus in relation to issues of religious belief. He singled
out the abolition of religious oath in courts, the introduction of the
option for a secular funeral, and, most importantly, the deletion of the
category of religion from identity cards,1 the document (issued by the
police) that Greek citizens are supposed to carry with them at all times
(Ethnos, 6 May 2000).2 For Stathopoulos as well as for other academics
and commentators, the third reform was a necessary measure in order to
ensure respect for human rights and, in particular, prevent discrimina-
tion against non Orthodox Greek citizens.3 Needless to say, this was a


Journal of Modern Greek Studies, Volume 21, 2003.
                                           153
154    Yannis Stavrakakis

view not shared by Archbishop Christodoulos—the head of the Holy
Synod of the autocephalous Church of Greece and religious leader of
the Greek Orthodox majority of the population.4 Setting the tone of
what was to follow, he responded that on this issue “only one factor exists
and this is the people, that cannot and should not be ignored” (Eleftherotypia,
9 May 2000).
       At first no one thought that this “dogfight” would have any serious
political consequences given that most attempts of the government to
intervene into issues related to religion, during the 1980s and 1990s,
ended in compromise for fear of alienating practicing Orthodox voters.5
Indeed the first responses both from the government spokesman and
the minister of education and religious affairs were pointing in this
direction.6 Everything changed, however, when the newly instituted—
and up to that time generally unknown—independent Hellenic Data
Protection Authority convened on the 15 May to discuss the issue. Its
unanimous decision was that religious belief, among a set of other
sensitive personal data, should be excluded from identity cards. A few
days later, on 24 May, the prime minister confirmed during the question
session in parliament that his government would stand by and imple-
ment the decision to exclude the category of religion from identity
cards. There is little doubt that the prime minister’s firm position, which
surprised many, reflected his personal views and, at the same time, could
enhance the left-wing profile of his government that had been unable to
escape the policy limitations set by market globalization on, more or
less, all European center-to-left governments. On the other hand, many
PASOK politicians and supporters remained skeptical and even wary of
the so-called “political cost” that such a decision would entail in view of
the influence of the Church on certain sectors of the population.
       In any case, this decision has triggered an extraordinary reaction
on behalf of the Greek Church, a reaction that has polarized Greek
society and has been dominating political life and media coverage for
most of 2000 and 2001. Archbishop Christodoulos7 led a campaign to
oppose it, articulating a discourse that was marked by a clear political
profile. Starting from the premise that an identity card is not a mere
administrative document, but also “a proof of my personality”
(Christodoulos 2000b:321), he characterized the exclusion as a coup
d’etat, and started a struggle to overturn it. This struggle included mass
rallies in Thessaloniki and Athens, rallies that were attended by hun-
dreds of thousands of people, interventions in the media—which started
following him day in and day out in order to transmit his latest attack on
the government—and a campaign to gather as many signatures as
possible calling for a referendum on the issue, even though such a
procedure was not provisioned in the constitution. The polarization was
                 On the “Politicization” of Greek Church Discourse          155

also reflected within the political and party systems: New Democracy, the
largest opposition center-to-right party, supported almost uncondition-
ally the Archbishop in what many journalists were quick to call his “holy
war”—with many of its MPs attending the rallies and most of them,
including its leader, Costas Karamanlis, signing the petition for a
referendum.8
       On 28 August 2001, it was announced that the Church had
managed to gather 3,008,901 signatures asking for a referendum on the
optional inclusion of the category of religion in Greek identity cards.9
Although it seems that signing the petition or opposing the government
decision—a view shared by approximately 60% of the Athenians, accord-
ing to some polls (Ta Nea, 2 July 2000)—did not entail alienation from
the government, given that most polls over the last period showed no
significant effects on its overall electoral appeal, there is no doubt that,
by all standards, the number of signatures was impressive. At the same
time, however, it revealed that the Church hierarchy was unable to
mobilize the majority of its supposed following on such an (apparently)
crucial issue. At around the same time (27 June 2001) the appeal of a
group of theology professors and laymen against the exclusion of the
category of religion from identity cards was rejected by the constitu-
tional court (State Council—Conceil d’Etat), which decided that any
mention of religion (either obligatory or optional) is unconstitutional.
At any rate, a deep division was established in Greek public life and no
obvious solution was visible since both the government and the Church
were holding firm to their positions.
       On 29 August, however, the Church received another, this time
unexpected and much more politically significant blow, a blow that led
to a suspension of most politicized activities on its behalf. After receiving
the Archbishop and representatives from the Holy Synod who were
supposed to inform him on the number of signatures collected by the
Church, the President of the Republic, Constantine Stephanopoulos—a
former conservative politician—issued a statement that included the
following lines:
     The conditions for the calling of a referendum on the issue of identity
     cards have not been met, everybody is obliged to abide by the rules of the
     current Law and the signatures which were collected with a procedure that
     falls outside legally instituted procedures, cannot overturn the provisions
     of the Constitution (Kathimerini, 30 August 2001).

     This was generally viewed as a clear prioritizing of the secular
model of a “neutral” rule of Law over the identification of Hellenism and
Orthodoxy over and above the Law that the Church was putting forward. It
was even more damaging because it was coming from someone whose
156    Yannis Stavrakakis

institutional position, popularity—that was rated to be higher than the
Archbishop’s—and conservative credentials left no obvious strategy for
the Church hierarchy to continue its struggle at the same level of
intensity without creating a national schism.10
      Following the President’s statement, which retroactively marked a
turning point in the entire issue, and the end of a whole cycle of
mobilizations and discursive articulations on behalf of the Church and
the Archbishop, it is time to reflect on the issue. My reflections will not
be articulated in a vacuum,11 but will take into account the points
already made by many commentators and analysts. Although I am
suspicious of any pretensions to “neutrality,” I will try in what follows to
avoid the polemical style that has characterized most academic and non-
academic discussions so far. In this paper, I will limit myself to a
discussion of the central issue of the politicization of Church discourse in
Greece. In fact, I will examine the nature of this politicization against
the background of global developments and by taking into account its
theoretical and historical context. This exploration is designed to clear
the ground from certain ideas and stereotypes that have dominated
much of the debate but have failed to address crucial aspects of the
phenomenon under examination.

Politicization: Signs and Interpretations

One of the conclusions shared by most commentators is that all these
events marked a “politicization” of the discourse of the Church of
Greece. Indeed, this politicization is so obvious in the Archbishop’s
discourse that, by now, everyone in Greece is, more or less, used to it.
Take for example his most well-known book comprising a series of
articles published in the 1990s. The titles of some of the articles are
indicative: “Nation and Orthodoxy: The Unbreakable Bond”
(Christodoulos 1999:145), “The Volcano of Islamism—the Lava that
‘Burns’ the Balkans” (Christodoulos 1999:69), “Lost Chances for an
‘Orthodox Axis’ in the Balkans” (Christodoulos 1999:100), etc. Instead
of discussing strictly religious, theological or even moral issues in any of
the above, he debates what he calls the “great” national issues, especially
those “related to the great horizons of our race [g°now], our identity and
our survival” (Christodoulos 1999:13). He singles out the challenges
posed by globalization, the membership of Greece in the European
Union, Islamic fundamentalism, etc.
      It is also clear that these texts are marked by a feeling of
eschatological urgency; they are written as a warning and propose a set
of measures to avoid “tragic consequences for Hellenism and Ortho-
doxy” (Christodoulos 1999:15)—two terms that are inextricably linked
                 On the “Politicization” of Greek Church Discourse         157

for the Archbishop. His aim is to address the “final stage of a slippery
course” which has led to our current identity crisis (Christodoulos
1999:81), especially now that the Greek people are “feeling surrounded
by the vultures of misfortune with their deadly stench” (Christodoulos
1999:153). In the above articles, the Church is presented as the institu-
tion that can offer the leadership necessary to combat what threatens
Greece and Hellenism with “extinction” (Christodoulos 1999:219).12
The Archbishop proposes that “If we all become clean and good
Orthodox Christians, then we will bring change to our homeland”
(Christodoulos 1999:83).
       Moreover, although sometimes the Church denies vehemently that
its discourse is politicized, the Archbishop himself has actually conceded
this point. In the past, the Archbishop’s view was that if the Orthodox
Church were to become politicized, that “would entail its spiritual
alienation” (Christodoulos 1999:116). However, in a more recent rally in
Athens, the Archbishop also stated explicitly: “They accuse us that we
speak politically, that our discourse is political. We reply, yes our discourse
is political, only in the ancient Greek sense of the term; it was never
associated with party politics” (Christodoulos 2000a:66, my emphasis).
He reiterates this view in a lengthy interview given to the newspaper To
Vima on 11 February 2001, stating that “all of our actions are political”
(Christodoulos 2001a:17).
       The Archbilshop’s “politicized” discourse is not in dispute. The
Archbishop does not deny it or downplay it. In fact, some of his speeches
reveal that not only are they political, but also that his discourse is
primarily a political discourse. This “politicization” seems to be premised
on a particular understanding of the role of the Church within Greek
society. The state is deemed by and large incompetent in performing its
duty vis-à-vis Hellenism. Therefore, the Church—which had previously
helped the state to fulfill a guardian’s role—is now left alone to
accomplish this task. As Tassos Pappas put it, “the discourse of
Christodoulos aims at administering national culture and reproducing
nationalist ideology—in other words, at substituting the uniting func-
tion of the state that is weakening, with the Church” (2001:53).
       As we shall see, the Church of Greece has been invested from its
creation as an independent institution with a political role. Antonis
Manitakis has submitted several positions that are relevant here: “The
aims of the nation-state determined the position and the function of the
Church in Greek society.” As a public/state authority, the Church
endorsed all national aims and was transformed into a “national”
Church. “And now we live the following paradox: whereas the Polity is
gradually de-nationalized, the Orthodox Church of Greece, fearful and
defensive against the challenges, feeling that its ‘ethnocratic’ identity is
158    Yannis Stavrakakis

threatened” attempts to embody this role by itself and against the
“pluralist” state, which is now attacked for its “weakened national
sensitivity” (Manitakis 2000:17–18, 91). The above explanations seem to
adequately reflect the position of the Church itself.13 It is clear for the
Archbishop that, with the strengthening of the European Union and
Greece’s full participation in it, “the state has ceased to be the obvious
guarantor of national identity.” As a result: “The salvation of Hellenism
can only be the task and accomplishment of the Church” (Christodoulos
1999:222–223).14
       The question is how social and political science will understand
and explain this politicization. Those commentators who tend to adopt
strong “enlightened,” “modernizing,” or “pro-Western” perspectives,
often express their surprise at the fact that the Church hierarchy and the
Archbishop use “political” means (like mass rallies) to openly oppose a
democratically elected government.15 For these commentators, religious
faith is—or rather should be—a matter of personal attachment that has no
place in the public domain and should be confined to the private space,
the individual life of citizens, or to an isolated/insulated niche of civil
society.16
       Thus, many commentators have criticized the Archbishop mainly
on the grounds that his political interventions are not justified within an
order that assigns these political duties to other organs of the polity, on
the grounds that his religious discourse does not legitimately occupy the
public (political) space. For most of them, these problems stem from the
lack of a constitutional separation between Church and state; such a
separation, according to this view, would dispel any confusion once and
for all. There are, however, at least two major problems with such a view;
a theoretical/analytical one and a historical one. To begin with, this view
relies heavily on a one-sided, ideological understanding of seculariza-
tion which sees the complex socio-political realities of our late modern
age through an outmoded and distorting normative lens. Furthermore,
this view fails to take into account the historical background of the
Greek case, that is, the Greek Church’s long tradition of politicization.
Hence, many commentators were taken by surprise from the recent
developments. It is clearly worth examining these two problems in some
detail.

Secularization and Politicization

The aforementioned position seems to take for granted an extreme
version of the Enlightenment ideal of secularization, involving a total
differentiation of the social space.17 As far as secularization is concerned,
there is no doubt that, in its soft version (as the relative marginalization
                 On the “Politicization” of Greek Church Discourse       159

of religion in increasingly “desacralized” and “rationalized” societies)
secularization is a reality; but only a partial reality.18 Although religious
attitudes have indeed changed in modernity (with a decline in religiosity
and a “privatization” of faith), this change is neither uniform nor, by
definition, irreversible. In David Martin’s words, we “need not assume
that secularization is a very long term or inevitable trend” (Martin
1978:12), especially in an age in which any sense of historical inevitabil-
ity is disrupted and religion itself is making a comeback. As for the
prediction that religion would disappear completely in enlightened
societies—which is the strong version of the secularization thesis—this
seems to be based on the attitudes of a limited “scientific elite” and does
not reflect conclusive trends in the overall population (Martin 1969:4),
nor does it reflect the global reality of contradictory forces (Keddle
1997:22).
       It is also premised on a philosophy of history that views progress
towards a rational and secular ideal society as ultimately inevitable, a
view by now discredited. It was most recently attacked through discus-
sions around modernity, late modernity, and post-modernity, as well as
through the increasing awareness of contingency and historicity charac-
teristic of poststructuralist theorization.19 Even sociologists like Peter
Berger, who were initially of the rather opposite view, have come to
acknowledge the importance of counter-secular developments and are
increasingly putting into question the inevitability of secularization:
“The world today . . . is massively religious, and it is anything but the
secularized world that had been predicted (be it joyfully or despon-
dently) by so many analysts of modernity” (Berger in Ahdar 2000:3).
Genuine defenders of modernity have also pointed to the fact that one-
sided models of modernization and secularization ignore the historicity
of human social existence and the irreducibility of contingency within it
(Lipowatz 1995:168).
       On another level, one could even argue that a form of seculariza-
tion—understood, this time, as a focus on worldly affairs—begins with
Christianity itself insofar as Christianity introduces a “historicization of
Eschatology,” a God that intervened in human history by sending his
Son “into the world,” initiating thus a new historical time with a clear
eschatological future (Blumenberg 1983:40, Ian 1999:5), and with
whom we establish a personal relation, a notion very much stressed in
Eastern Orthodox theology. In terms of their organization, almost from
the beginning, Christian institutions also have been secularized, entail-
ing bureaucratization and close relations with power and authority
(Martin 1969:23). Besides, as specialized social institutions, Churches
are themselves products of social differentiation (O’Dea 1966:81). In
other words, although secularization has been crucial in the modern
160    Yannis Stavrakakis

experience, it can only be understood as a contingent and partial trend.
Trends of this sort have to be understood as the result of social
negotiation and political struggle, of a non-teleological historical devel-
opment that is bound to produce side-effects and resistances, including
the recent global comeback and “de-privatization” of religion. Moreover,
secularization has not functioned merely as an external influence
limiting the social function and appeal of religious institutions, but has
been a constitutive element in Christian Churches and, as we shall see
from our analysis of the Greek case, has sometimes led to a manipula-
tion that indirectly enhanced their social and political salience.
       The dislocation of the rationalist faith in the disappearance of
religion and in the capacity of secular reason to resolve both practical
and metaphysical questions (the so-called crisis of modernity), the
collapse of the ideological imaginary of the Cold War, and the various
dislocations produced in the course of globalization, have led during
the last two decades to the return of religion, a return that takes a variety
of different forms, from Islamic fundamentalism to “New Age” mysti-
cism: “Contrary to once widespread expectations that religion would
gradually disappear as a political force in modernizing societies, reli-
gious communities have been getting stronger in most nations over the
last two decades or so” (Hasenclever & Rittberger 2000:641).20 The so-
called Revenge of God is increasingly accompanying the Death of God
proclaimed more than a century ago by Nietzsche. This comeback,
however, does not always signal a denial of modernity (at least not in
toto) and cannot be reduced to a mere side-effect of economic underde-
velopment: “It is occurring in countries with different religious tradi-
tions and at different levels of their economic development, so it can not
be explained as a feature of economic underdevelopment” (Thomas
2000:816). Most important, it is by no means limited to the Third World.
It is present even in the center of the “secularized” West, in particular
the USA.21
       As Marcia Ian has put it “if ‘secularization’ means a general falling
away of religion into a world increasingly devoid of religion, then
America has not secularized” (Ian 1999:4). Paradoxically, one of the
conditions of possibility for this trend was the constitutional separation
between Church and state, a founding principle of the United States of
America.22 Setting aside any liberal interpretations of this principle, this
separation in the U.S. constitution was initially conceived and eventually
functioned to protect the religious domain from state intervention (Ian
1999:17). As a result, it benefited the Churches (Martin 1978:70),
leading to a thriving of religious culture and to a permeability of the
barrier between Church and state, this time originating from the
religious side. Hence the “politicization of some forms of American
                 On the “Politicization” of Greek Church Discourse       161

religion” (Swatos 1998:89) mainly through the emergence of the
religious right (Ian 1999:17):
     Dedicated to correcting this divagation from the Way, to realigning
     America with the Christian agenda they interpret as inherent in the
     nation’s founding, groups such as the Christian Coalition have been busy
     amassing power at national, state, and local levels. (Ian 1999:30)

      The following vignette is revealing of these developments: Two
days after the events of 11 September 2001, “Jerry Falwell, founder of the
Moral Majority, told Christian Coalition founder Pat Robertson (on the
latter’s television show), that ‘God continues to lift the curtain and allow
the enemies of America to give us probably what we deserve’. They
agreed that the attack was God’s punishment for American toleration of
pagans, abortionists, feminists and gays: ‘I point the finger in their face,’
said Falwell. ‘You helped this happen’” (Lind 2001:26).23 Ironically, a
Western religious fundamentalism is called to remedy a non-Western
religious fundamentalism. However, it is not only religious leaders who
put forward their own interpretations of political events and intervene
in politics. What is most astonishing is that in a country founded on the
so-called “Wall of separation” between Church and state (a phrase
coined by Jefferson) politicians seem more than willing to respond in a
way which legitimizes the collapse of separation and of secularization in
general: “Today the Christian right is far more powerful in American
politics than it was in 1800 or 1900 . . . in 2000, both the Republican and
the Democratic presidential candidates claimed to be evangelical Protes-
tants who had personally ‘found Jesus’” (Lind 2001:26).
      Hence, secularization (in the sense of a gradual disappearance of
religion) cannot be accepted as an unconditional and inevitable trend,
although secularization (in the sense of the permeability of any barrier
between state and church, and of the inherent secular dimensions of the
sacred) cannot be disputed or, in practice, fully contained by any legal
separation. Furthermore, although social differentiation is both a reality
and a necessity for the reproduction of modern societies it does not
entail the strict separation between specialized areas of the social, a
point that was stressed by sociological theory. In that sense, “religion is
interconnected with the other elements of society and culture in
complex ways” (O’Dea 1966:99). There is always interaction between the
religious and the cultural, the political, the economic and the societal,
even when these are understood as distinct domains (Lipowatz 1995:168).
As Rene Remond put it, “the idea of an absolute separation of religion
from society may be a utopia that could not withstand the force of
reality” (Remond 1999:8).
      The same applies to relations between Law and religion: “Since
162    Yannis Stavrakakis

religion and law are significant aspects of mankind’s social existence a
complete compartmentalization of them is hardly practically feasible,
even were it desirable in theory (which is not)” (Ahdar 2000:3). In that
sense, the fact that the discussion in Greece has been largely hegemonized
by a legal problematic and mainly focused on the issue of the legal
separation between church and state, as if such a separation would be
able to contain the politicization of the Church of Greece and offer total
insulation to a secular political system, is rather misleading.24 Although
it constitutes a desirable development, such a separation (as we have
seen) is no panacea; moreover, such borders and frontiers, enshrined or
not in legal or constitutional frameworks, are always the cause of
tensions, disputes, conflicting interpretations and reinterpretations
(Zacharopoulos 1999:9), and have to be accepted as such. It could never
be otherwise as long as we are still far from the end of history: the
regulation of church-state relations will always be a matter of political
choice, beyond all (useful) legal systematizations and normativities
(Dimitropoulos 2001:24).25 In that sense, especially within a non-
totalitarian framework, separation can only be a form of relation (even if
it will be a relation of tension). It neither guarantees nor presupposes a
wholly secular society or the total exclusion of religion from political
discourse (Adams & Emmerich 1990:51).
       One may disagree with the way the Archbishop or the Church
interpret and understand these frontiers, or with the way he is articulat-
ing his opposition to the redrawing put forward by the government—an
admittedly limited, reluctant and, at the same time, clumsy redrawing.
However, no solution will follow from idealizing and essentializing
“impossible” or, at any rate, unstable distinctions. Take, for example, the
argument of Manitakis and Anagnostopoulou, to name just two of the
supporters of such a view. They both seem to argue that it is possible to
distinguish, in an almost self-evident way, “spiritual” from “political”
issues (Manitakis 2000:139, 186; Anagnostopoulou 2000:343).26 One can
think of many issues that are both, but even if this distinction is accepted
as possible in principle we would need to decide, every time, whether a
particular issue is “spiritual” or “political,” unless someone claims to
have a universal criterion for distinguishing between the two in ad-
vance.27 And how else can this be possible without open discussion and
deliberation? Naturally, no side should be silenced in this debate, even if
some of us disagree with its views or style (provided that it does not
resort to the violent overthrow of the constitution of a democratic
polity).
       In fact it is open discussion and deliberation that give us the right
to question traditionalist or fundamentalist values and standpoints. In
other words, conceptual distinctions, legal separations and differentia-
                  On the “Politicization” of Greek Church Discourse         163

tions are necessary but can only be negotiated and legitimized through
the political; otherwise, by sticking to some kind of legal essentialism, we
run the danger of reoccupying an ultimately fundamentalist position.28
Hence strict differentiations—such as the one proposed between the
“spiritual” and the “political”—are revealed not only as impossible29 but
also as undesirable. Why should one assign the spiritual exclusively to
the jurisdiction of the Church or religion in general? Do we really want
a de-spiritualized politics? Wouldn’t that enhance the trend for a “de-
politicized,” “neutral,” technocratic politics which is pushing passion out
of political life and threatens contemporary democracy? These ques-
tions acquire a special validity in the Greek context in which the word
“spiritual” (pneumatikÒ ) has a much broader meaning and socio-
political relevance than in English and from which a distinction like the
German one between “geistig ” and “geistlich” is lacking.30
       Moreover, perhaps unwillingly, such an argument justifies the idea
that there are social domains immune from political re-fashioning and
democratic control.31 This is a profoundly conservative argument used
to legitimize all sorts of established orders (most often, in our days, neo-
liberal globalization). In an age when “everything is political,”32 when
politicization has been put forward as a conditio sine qua non for the
radicalization of democracy, sticking to essentialist frontiers is neither
theoretically sound nor politically productive. In that sense, it is not
politicization in general which is to blame; on the contrary, it is only
politicization that will make possible, in due course, the democratization
of Church institutions themselves. It is the particular politicization many
dislike.
       Consider the French example: When, in the early 1970s, the
Church intervened publicly “with declarations against sacred cows like
nuclear weapons, the rightist government resented it, and individual
Catholics with military associations readily embraced anti-clericalism,
telling the Church to mind its own business; if it could not defend order
as it had in the past, it should at least stick to ‘spiritual’ matters” (Ravitch
1990:154, my emphasis). Although often justified, the frustrated reac-
tion of ultra-modernist sectors in Greece is not that different, provided
one makes the necessary “translations.” The Church is almost denied
the right to speak on socio-political issues ultimately because its dis-
course is so alien from an image of Greece (as a thoroughly modernized,
secularized democracy) entertained by these analysts—so much so that
it becomes traumatic even to acknowledge its presence within the public
domain.33 Thus we experience a paradoxical situation in which instead
of analyzing its discourse seriously, understanding and challenging it
accordingly (something that becomes easier from the moment the
Church itself articulates a political discourse, opening itself to public
164    Yannis Stavrakakis

criticism) some would prefer to silence the Church, exclude it from the
public domain, avoiding any contact with what for them can only be a
traumatic encounter with the dark side of Greek culture.34

Burdens of History

The aforementioned attitude also fails, to a large extent, to register
seriously the consequences of the role played by Orthodoxy and the
Church of Greece during the last few centuries and especially since it
became an autocephalous Church (1833), independent from the Patri-
archate of Constantinople.35 In Byzantium the two distinct domains
(Church and State, ﬂervsÊnh and basile¤a, sacerdotium and imperium)
were conceived as being in “harmony” with each other but retaining some
independence. In practice it was often the case that the one interfered
in the other’s domain (most often the emperor, the Pontifex Maximus,
who had a special role as convener of Ecumenical Councils, and was the
only force of law in the Empire) occasionally creating tensions in the
“partnership” (Runciman 1968:55–74).36
      Things changed after the Fall of Constantinople. Under Islam, the
Sultan chose to become “the protector of Orthodoxy” (Ware 1997:88),
and “paradoxically enough, the things of Caesar now became more
closely associated with the things of God than they had ever been before.
For the Muslims drew no distinction between religion and politics . . .
The Orthodox Church therefore became a civil as well as a religious
institution: it was turned into the Rum Millet, the ‘Roman nation’. The
ecclesiastical structure was taken over in toto as an instrument of secular
administration” (Ware 1997:89).37 Thus religious and secular powers
were united in the person of the Patriarch of Constantinople who was
gradually recognized as the secular representative and leader of the
Orthodox populations within the Ottoman system (Divani 2001:40,
Kitromilides 1989). The Orthodox Church was invested with privileges,
functions and powers of jurisdiction it had never enjoyed in Byzantine
times (Runciman 1968:181).
      The secular position enjoyed by the Orthodox Church did contrib-
ute considerably to the preservation of the collective identity of the
Balkan peoples under Ottoman rule (Svoronos 1982:163), not least “by
institutionalizing and safeguarding the distinction of the Christian
subjects from their Muslim rulers” (Rudometov 1998:32). However, this
distinction was primarily religious and not national. Nationalism, a
modern movement, was absent from the Ottoman (and from the
Byzantine) era and the various Balkan ethnies (Greeks, Serbs, Albanians,
etc.), to use a term introduced by Anthony Smith,38 were marked by a
                 On the “Politicization” of Greek Church Discourse      165

fluidity that made possible their unified status vis-à-vis the Sublime Porte
as members of the religiously defined Rum-millet (Rudometov 1998:32).
      Regarding the status of the Hellenic ethnic community, at best we
can speak about cultural elements and an ethnic sense of belonging,
that was initially (from the end of the Byzantine era when it resurfaced
or rather was reconstructed) and throughout most of the Ottoman
conquest subordinated to religious identification. When Georgios
Scholarios was asked on the eve of the fall of the Byzantine Empire how
he would define himself, although he often called his people Hellenes,
he remarked: “I do not call myself a Hellene because I do not believe as
the Hellenes believed. I might call myself Byzantine because I was born
in Byzantium. But I prefer simply to call myself a Christian” (Scholarios
in Runciman 1968:121). During that time, a series of cultural elements
pertaining to a way of life (like Greek language, religion or a sense of
belonging39) were articulated in an emerging Hellenic ethnie and were
preserved and protected by the Church in its new position as a
religious/secular institution, subsequently to be used selectively for
purposes of nation-building. In that sense, the Church “preserved the
languages and the medieval imperial memories of the Balkan peoples, a
heritage that in time was to be politicized by nationalism and made the
basis of historiographical anachronisms” (Kitromilides 1989:178).40
      When the new Greek state was formed (1830), it tried, under the
influence of Enlightenment ideals regarding statecraft, to limit this all-
encompassing role (Frazee 1969:48) and also to modernize the Church
by separating it from the pre-modern ecumenicity of the Patriarchate
and its extended role within the Ottoman state; this modernization
entailed the nationalization of the Church. The main architect of this
refashioning was Georg Von Maurer, a German Protestant and member
of King Otto’s regency: “If ever a church was legally stripped of authority
and reduced to complete dependence on the state, Maurer’s constitu-
tion did it to the church of Greece” (Frazee 1969:114). True, it was
impossible for the Church of the new Greek state to remain under the
auspices of an institution subordinate to the Sultan; “it also needed
reorganization, but instead of helping the church to make the necessary
internal improvements, Maurer’s constitution simply made it an agency
of an authoritarian state and a poor one at that” (Frazee 1969:124).41
The result was a gradual “instrumentalization” of the Church of Greece
(Demertzis 1995:10, Georgiadou 1995:307, Georgiadou 1996:250, 271),
the “total submission of the Church to the state” (Kitromilides 1989:182)
to the point of becoming “a branch of civil service” (Mouzelis 1994:64),
an instrumentum regni (Makrides 1991:291), a mere ideological weapon
in the hands of the Greek state (Skopetea 1988:133; Dimitropoulos
166    Yannis Stavrakakis

2001:61). The conversion of the Church of Greece to the secular values
of Greek nationalism, its transformation into “a secular doctrine and
certainly one at odds with its own deposit of faith” (Martin 1978:272),
was so deep that “the Church of Greece spearheaded all nationalist
initiatives in the latter part of the nineteenth and throughout the
twentieth century” (Kitromilides 1989:166).42
       In the twentieth century the open politicization of the Church
took a variety of new forms: The Church sided with the king against the
reformer prime minister Venizelos who was excommunicated and
anathematized by the Archbishop in 1916; it played an active role in the
ideological aspect of the “struggle against communism” during the Civil
War (1947–1949); and was largely obedient to the “religious ideology”
(“a Greece of Christian Greeks”) introduced by the dictatorship (1967–
1974) (Karayannis 1997, Venizelos 2000:22, Yannaras 1983:247, Metallinos
2000:40).43

Conclusion
       The recent “politicization” of religious discourse in Greece should
not, therefore, come as a sudden surprise. In fact, politicization was
there all along. The heritage of the official Church in Greece is a
heritage of Political Orthodoxy (Agouridis 2000:360), to use a neologism
highlighted by Beck in his analysis of Byzantine civilization (Beck
2000:119–146). Orthodoxy seems to have been always already “secular”
and “political,” either under the Byzantine and the Ottoman system, or
under the auspices of Greek nationalism and the direct control of the
Greek state. Although the borders between the secular and the sacred
are always unclear and socially constructed, in Greece one has to admit
that the situation was more acute due to the burdens of history. Even
attempts to differentiate between the state and the Church and limit the
scope of religion (such as the autocephalia of the Church) eventually had
the opposite results; they increased politicization by making the Church
a state institution. If this was indeed envisaged as an act of secularization,
of the desacralization of the public (political) space, it is an act that went
too far. If, in other words, the aim was to have a church subjected to the
state (Anagnostopoulou 2000:350), it has been so successful that now we
have a Church that has become so secularized that it almost wants to
replace the state. By nationalizing and politically investing (manipulat-
ing) the Church, the Greek state further encouraged and renewed
trends already dominant, leading to the current crisis.
       If the current politicization seems striking and surprising to many,
it is because since 1974 the state has, to a large extent, ceased to play the
                 On the “Politicization” of Greek Church Discourse        167

role of the direct controller and manipulator of the Church. Many
thought that this would prompt the Church to follow a de-politicized
course. Such a view, however, could only be based on a neglect of the
relevant historical record (the long-term politicization of the Church is
very difficult to change overnight) and of recent global trends that
question the strong version of secularization (as the inevitable
marginalization of religious institutions and beliefs) all of which point to
the inherently politically constructed nature of social differentiation.
What is indeed new is neither the politicization nor the secularization of
the Greek Church; what is new is the emancipation of a traditionally
politicized Church from the state.
      This is not to say that the form this emancipation is taking is worthy
of the name: in fact, unable to assume a new role beyond its customary
“voluntary servitude” to the ideological priorities of the nation-state,
unable to respond positively and creatively to this emancipation from
above, fearful of the risks and challenges involved in the changing
environment, the Greek Church in reality attempts to preserve the old
regime (Kalaintzidis 2001:59–60). Some sort of separation is bound to
follow (1) insofar as the state continues its course towards pluralization
and loses its interest in controlling and using the Church, and (2) insofar
as the Church, as a result, assumes over time its new emancipated and
more independent position. The Archbishop himself, then bishop of
Dimitrias, had accepted this in 1990 (Eleftherotypia, 14 June 2000). Such a
development, however, will not be the automatic or inevitable result of
some universal principle or trend, but of a long process of negotiation
and change with its ups and downs, tensions and contradictions.
      If legal separation in France was pursued “with moderation and
relative generosity” (Ravitch 1990:104), despite its long and strong anti-
clerical tradition, one would expect any political initiative in Greece to
combine, at least in a similar measure, resolve with respect.44 The success of
such an initiative will also depend on the ability to cultivate alternative
(modernizing) political and cultural ideals and mythomoteurs with deep
popular appeal and hegemonic force. This remains to be seen.

                                              university of nottingham
168      Yannis Stavrakakis

                                            NOTES

      Acknowledgments. It has been argued that it is always impolite to argue religion or
politics with strangers and dangerous to do so with friends. I am probably doing both in
this paper and would never find the courage to embark in such a task without the support
and valuable comments of colleagues who read earlier drafts of this text. In particular, I
would like to thank Othon Anastasakis, Nicos Demertzis, Jason Glynos, Marcia Ian, Vassilis
Lambropoulos, Thanos Lipowatz, Nicos Mouzelis, Francisco Panizza and Loukas Tsoukalis.
Many thanks are also due to the editor of JMGS, Stratos Constantinidis, and to the two
anonymous referees. This paper is the first part of a much broader research project
focusing on the discourse analysis of contemporary Church discourse in Greece. See, in
this respect, its companion pieces, “Religious Populism and Political Culture: The Greek
Case,” South European Society and Politics, 7(3), 2003 and “Religion and Populism in
Contemporary Greece,” forthcoming in a collective volume edited by Francisco Panizza,
provisionally entitled Populism and the Mirror of Democracy, London: Verso, 2004.
      1
        It seems that, in Greece, religion was first introduced by law in official identity cards
in 1945, although the measure had been already imposed by the Nazi forces during the
occupation (1941–1944), perhaps as a way of distinguishing Jews from non Jews (Alivizatos
2001a:314–315, Ierotheos 2000:84–85). It has been recently shown that religion was also
included in the equivalents of identity cards introduced in the Ottoman Empire in 1880
(http://iospress.gr/mikro2001/mikro20010113.htm).
      2
        Also see Stathopoulos, 1993, and Stathopoulos, 1999, for a more extensive and
detailed account of his legal views and the range of his proposals.
      3
        Since 1993, Greece has been convicted eight times by the European Court of Human
Rights (Strasbourg) on issues related to discrimination against Greeks belonging to
religious minorities (Alivizatos 2001b:9). It is generally accepted that part of the legal
framework regulating the practice of religion is outdated and biased in favor of the
constitutionally “Established Church” (Eastern Orthodox Christianity). To give an ex-
ample we can refer to the general law pertaining to the construction of churches and the
designation of places of worship (Venizelos 2000:117). As Alivizatos has pointed out: “This
law, enacted in 1938 by the Metaxas dictatorship, provides that, beyond the usual building
permit, the construction of any church or place of worship requires previous authorization
by the competent Greek Orthodox bishop irrespective of the religion that is to be
practiced in the specific place” (Alivizatos 1999:31). Although in 1969 the State Council
interpreted this law in a way making it possible for the administration not to abide by the
“opinion” of the Orthodox bishop involved, the fact of his involvement remains
(Dimitropoulos 2001:140). However, although the Church of Greece is enjoying a variety
of privileges within the Greek legal order, the Greek state “grants fewer privileges of this
sort than countries such as Ireland and, more recently, Poland and Croatia, which have
given the Roman Catholic Church a more important role on societal issues like abortion
and divorce” (Alivizatos 1999:28).
      4
        After the census of 1951 there are no official data on the number of Orthodox
Christians in Greece. According to the 1951 census, 96.7% of the population considered
themselves Orthodox (Georgiadou and Nikolakopoulos 2000:149). It seems that this sense
of belonging and identification remains to this date as strong, with a Eurobarometer survey
showing that in 1991, 98.2 % of the population considered themselves as belonging to the
Orthodox religion (Demertzis 1995:12). Church-going, on the other hand, has shown
some fluctuation, falling considerably since the 1960s, a trend that was consolidated after
the 1967–74 dictatorship (partly because of the submission of the Church hierarchy to the
junta) but showing an upward trend after the mid-nineties (Georgiadou and Nikolakopoulos
2000:151–152). However, although regular church-going and church-attendance has been
                     On the “Politicization” of Greek Church Discourse                     169

lower in Greece than in many European countries (Demertzis 1995:12), this does not seem
to indicate a loosening of the identificatory bonds with Orthodoxy since “in Orthodoxy
there is less emphasis than in Roman Catholicism upon the obligation to attend church
regularly” (Ware 1983:219), and any gaps in church attendance seem to be compensated
by other bonds between Orthodoxy and the Greek society. Indeed identification with
Orthodoxy does not seem to follow from the usual expressions of religiosity (church
attendance) nor usually from a valuation of the hierarchy of the official Church itself
(Georgiadou 1996:268). The identification is grafted, enshrined, and reproduced through
a variety of other institutions and cultural activities (from state celebrations to the personal
attachment to particular icons and local Saints and the association of particular religious
feasts with special practices, customs and foods—for example the paschal lamb—that a
family traditionally enjoys). It has also benefited from the protection of the state
(Georgiadou and Nikolakopoulos 2000:169). As far as the theological and ecclesiastical
parameters of Orthodoxy are concerned, see Yannaras 1991; Ware 1997. For more
information on the structure and institutional characteristics of the Church of Greece, see
Ware 1983.
      5
        These interventions included the introduction of civil marriage (which was eventu-
ally recognized in 1982 as equivalent to—the much more popular, to this date—religious
marriage, although initially conceived as a replacement or rather a prerequisite to
religious marriage), and the so-called issue of “Church property” which sparked a lot of
tension, culminating in the 1988 compromise (Karayannis 1997:195). The more general
issue of the full constitutional separation between church and state has been discussed
often since the restoration of democracy in 1975 but neither the government proposing
the constitution of 1975 (New Democracy) nor the PASOK governments that led the
processes of revising this constitution since then (in 1985 and 2000) found the courage to
push through such a measure that, by many accounts, would benefit not only the state but
also the church (Yannaras 1983b:166–167, Petrou 1999, Agouridis 2000).
      6
        This explains why the Church has claimed that it was taken by surprise when things
started to change. There is some truth in that in the following sense. The Church was not
informed or asked before the decision, nor was there any major pubic debate on the
issue—especially before the elections of 2000. It is very debatable if this was part of a
supposedly cunning plan on behalf of the government, an accusation subsequently made
by Church circles. Considered in the long term, however, one cannot overlook the fact
that there was a long history of discussions and public exchange on the issue at least since
1993, if not 1986, and two (aborted) attempts to introduce new legislation (Alivizatos
2001a:311). Ironically enough, the Archbishop himself recounts this long story in an
article written in 1997 and entitled “Religion in Identity Cards” (Christodoulos 1999:234–
241).
      7
        Appointed as head of the Orthodox Church of Greece only a few years before
(1998) and an emerging media star.
      8
        Of course, for parties to have links with Churches is not a rare phenomenon;
consider for example Christian democratic parties (Lamberts 1997) and especially the
Italian Christian Democrats whose primary aims included “safeguarding the role of the
Catholic Church in the country” (Leopardi and Wertman 1989:4). However, due to the
absence of a serious religious cleavage in the Greek political system, this was a move of
considerable importance for Greek politics.
      9
        According to the last census (2001) the population of Greece is 10,939,605 but the
electorate (which excludes foreigners and children) in the last general elections (2000)
was 8,976,135. As far as optional inclusion is concerned, by most accounts, it does not
preclude the possibility of discrimination, this time against those who have not declared
their religion.
170      Yannis Stavrakakis

      10
         A recent visit by the Archbishop to the minister of education and religious affairs,
ending a twenty month long gap in communication, might signify that, without changing
its position, the Church is now willing to seek a new modus vivendi with the government
(Kathimerini, 20 December 2001).
      11
         There is already a considerable bibliography on this issue, most if not all of it in
Greek. Apart from the numerous articles in newspapers and journals, some of which are to
be found in the bibliography, it is worth consulting a series of books that have started
appearing. See, in particular, Manitakis 2000, perhaps the most influential and detailed
account so far, Venizelos 2000, Andrianopoulos 2000, Pappas 2001, Kontogiorgis 2001,
Dimitropoulos 2001. The views of the Church and many of its supporters can be found in
a 711 pages long, detailed and inclusive collection of documents, papers and speeches:
Holy Synod of the Church of Greece 2000.
      12
         The agents of this extinction vary from Europeanization to modernization, from
globalization and intellectualism to secularism, etc. The Archbishop has even attacked on
similar grounds the new legal framework regarding conscientious objectors that gives
them the right to do social service instead of military service, which is still obligatory in
Greece (Christodoulos 1999:248).
      13
         Almost twenty years ago bishop Kallistos Ware had described one of the challenges
facing the Greek Church as follows: “The future vocation of the Greek Church is to be not
an ethnic body but a communion of faith and sacraments, a spiritual family to which men
and women belong, not because of the accident of birth, but in consequence of personal
conversion and self-dedication. Let the motto of the Church in the 1980s be, not Ekklisia
kai Ethnos, ‘Church and Nation’. Still less Ellas Ellinon Christianon, ‘a Greece of Greek
Christians’, but mia zosa kai elefthera Ekklisia, ‘a Church that is alive and free’” (Ware
1983:227). One can speculate that the course followed would probably disappoint Ware.
      14
         What is somewhat unusual is that one would expect this argument to function in a
way encouraging the Church to accept if not to lead the way towards its separation from
this “de-hellenized” state (Yannaras 1983b:198). The Church however is led to the
opposite conclusion and blocks such a development.
      15
         Imagine, however, the surprise of the Church hierarchy when their opinion on the
identity card issue was not only ignored but not even solicited before the particular
decision. Given their previous identification of Orthodoxy with Hellenism and the Greek
state, a link sanctioned for almost two centuries by the state itself, it must have been a
traumatic dislocation.
      16
         In the United States there is a similar reaction by Liberal intellectuals who feel
frightened from the rise of the religious right (Ian 1999:30). However, religion has also
been important for American Democrats and Liberals like Jimmy Carter and Jesse Jackson.
      17
         By “differentiation” we understand a process “whereby each social sector becomes
specialized . . . each social function forms a distinct specialized area,” one of the first signs
being the disconnection of church and state (Martin 1978:69). In sociological theory,
differentiation does not entail segmentation, the loss of contact between the different
specialized areas; on the contrary, it is often seen as leading to greater interdependence
and integration of parts (Abercrombie et al. 1988:70). This insight is often downplayed by
commentators of church-state relations in Greece who sometimes assume an extreme
version of total differentiation ignoring the interdependence involved in such social
processes. In this text, our criticisms are addressed towards this latter unreflective version
of “total differentiation.”
      18
         For a concise account of the process of secularization in Europe, see Remond 1999.
      19
         See, in this respect, Stavrakakis 1999.
      20
         This return of religion has been deemed so important as to deserve a special issue
of the international relations journal of the London School of Economics (Millennium), in
                     On the “Politicization” of Greek Church Discourse                   171

which it is proposed that a new branch of international relations should be introduced,
namely International Political Theology which, ironically, rhymes with International Political
Economy (Kubalkova 2000:675).
      21
         A general overview of the relation between politics and religion in the USA is given
in Wald 1992.
      22
         On the constitutional heritage of the USA regarding religious liberty, and the
tensions involved, see Adams and Emmerich 1990 and McConnell 2000.
      23
         Similar attitudes although marginal by and large, are not absent in Greece,
especially among fundamentalist circles of Greek-Orthodox zealots. As Makrides has put it:
“moralizing explanations of historical (e.g. the invasion of Cyprus by the Turks in 1974) or
physical phenomena (e.g. earthquakes) among fundamentalists are a standing rule.
According to bishop A. Kantiotis, for instance, the strong earthquake in Thessaloniki on
20 June 1978 was caused by the wrath of God due to the increasing number of abortions
and blasphemies in Greece” (Makrides 1990:61). See also the explanations given by local
priests and residents to contemporary “miracles” (like icons that cry, etc.), explanations
which are often uncritically presented by some Greek media, although usually rejected by
the official Church.
      24
         For an argument of this type, see Sotirelis 1999, where separation is presented as
the “exclusive solution” that would restore the integrity and reliability of the democratic
political system in Greece (Sotirelis 1999:64).
      25
         Even in France, another example of separation between Church and state
(institutionalized in 1905), one of the legacies of the anti-clericalism of the French
Revolution, the last two centuries have been marked by tensions, culminating in the
impressive street demonstrations by supporters both of secularism and of Catholic
education in 1994 (Knapp and Wright 2001:6, Bell and Criddle 1984:15–19). What is
revealed thus, is that “when husband and wife separate, it does not mean that they no
longer have any contact, if only to decide on the upbringing of the children born to them
when they were married. That is why the breach brought into force in France in 1905 was
unable to put a definitive end to all relations between religion and society” (Remond
1999:13). For a general overview of the relations between the Catholic Church and the
state in France, see Ravitch 1990.
      26
         This is only one of the possible forms the aforementioned argument stressing the
existence of an unbridgeable distinction between religion and politics can take. For a
development of the same, more or less, argument along the private/public axis, see
Manitakis 2001.
      27
         The issue is further complicated by the collapsing of the distinction between
“ought” and “is,” from the circularity caused by the conflation of legal and constitutional
deontological principles with the projection of the subjective desires of the analyst
(Dimoulis 1999:92). In other words, analyses of these issues often fall prey of a certain
wishful thinking. In Manitakis’s case, one can notice the imposition of a clear-cut
Enlightenment “ought” on our ambiguous late modern “is.” He is not only putting forward
the idea of a strict autonomy and independence between religion and politics as a
regulative ideal, but presents it as an unambiguous reality. The problem with such a view—
the ever-present distance between ideal and reality—is revealed when he argues that
“religion and politics occupy in social reality distinct and differentiated places; political
power is structured autonomously and independently from the economic and from any
ecclesiastical power” (Manitakis 2001:11). It suffices to say that we are in full agreement
with Manitakis on the latter part of his observation: financial and religious powers are
related to the political system in a similar fashion. The exact nature of this relation,
however, is hardly one of autonomy and independence; rather one of complicity and
interdependence (both above and under the table). Unfortunately, social reality is not
172      Yannis Stavrakakis

reducible to our normative ideals and desires and has to be approached and accounted as
such; any revealing social and political analysis has to start from the areas where an
“anomalous” reality seems to escape our preconceptions regarding its functioning and
structuration, no matter how “noble” these preconceptions may be.
       28
          As William Connolly has pointed out, “the historical modus vivendi of secularism,
while seeking to chasten religious dogmatism, embodies unacknowledged elements of
immodesty in itself” (Connolly 2000:4). In Keane’s words, the normative ideal of
secularism can even become “a positive substitute for God” (Keane 2000:5). What is
needed then is a “refashioning of secularism” (Connolly 2000:19) in a truly and not only
nominally pluralist direction engaging more openly with dimensions of being downplayed
or repressed in extreme forms of Enlightenment secularism. Even liberal political theory
is increasingly becoming sensitive to such a need, on a variety of grounds. First of all for
pragmatic reasons: “Some liberals have recently argued that no religious argument has any
place in the public square. This premise further isolates religious conservatives, making
them more hostile to liberalism and more illiberal” (Spinner-Halev 2000:19). According to
this argument, wherever possible, engaging with religious people is typically better than
shunning them (Spinner-Halev 2000:155). Secondly, “religious liberty means being able to
act on one’s beliefs. It would be peculiar to say that this is true in private but not in public;
such an argument presupposes a neat division between public and private that does not
exist. People are properly guided by their religious beliefs in all kinds of ethical decisions,
some of which inevitably spill over into politics” (Spinner-Halev 2000:146). There is no
reason why a “fundamentalist” secularist grounding of a political standpoint is more
legitimate from a religious one. Third, it is often the case that “religious views actually have
little to do with religion” (Spinner-Halev 2000:146). In that sense, the views themselves are
more important than their rhetorical reliance on a religious, secular or other principle.
       29
          Even Manitakis himself has recently acknowledged the relative nature of such
distinctions (Manitakis in Kitromilides et al. 2001:34).
       30
          For example, in Greek the expression “spiritual person” (pneumatikÒw ãnyrvpow)
has the same conceptual content with the word “intellectual” in English.
       31
          Here the political is not understood as a sub-system of the social topography but as
the ontological moment of all social reality. See, on this distinction between politics and
the political, Laclau 1990, Stavrakakis 1999, ch. 3.
       32
          However, this maxim has been often applied in a relativist and rather naive way.
       33
          At the same time the Church and the Archbishop are accused for not speaking
against the military regime of 1967–1974. Christodoulos has served as the Chief-secretary
of the Archbishop appointed by the junta and, by his own admission, knew nothing about
the ugly face of the repressive regime (tortures, etc.). However, the paradox here is that it
is often the same people that, on the one hand, deny the Church the right to intervene in
the public domain and, on the other, accuse the Archbishop for not speaking openly
against the junta (Zoumboulakis in Kitromilides et al. 2001:32).
       34
          The urge to repress this “ugly” trace of ethno-religious discourse ultimately signals
a difficulty in registering the ambivalent character of contemporary Greek identity and an
inability to effectively negotiate a new hegemonic modernizing future. Such a future
cannot ensue as the automatic result of an essentialized form of modernization. It would
require a paradigmatic shift in what has served as “the ‘myth-symbol’ complex, and
particularly the ‘mythomoteur’ or constitutive myth of the ethnic polity” (Smith 1986:15,
Armstrong 1982). The equation of Hellenism with Orthodoxy, the hegemony of an
“ethno-religious ideology” has served as one of the “founding myths,” one of the most used
clichés of the neo-hellenic state: “it is taught in schools, enunciated from the pulpit,
supported with fanaticism by politicians of all shades” (Pappas 2001:19). The fact that all
these claims are being increasingly pushed to the margins of political life, does not entail
                     On the “Politicization” of Greek Church Discourse                      173

their disappearance since they persevere in the form of largely unconscious fantasies, the
same way that “Orthodoxy means more to them [the Greeks] than their secular lifestyles
would allow us to believe” (Makrides 1991:286). Even if agreement is reached on the
content of such a modernization, its success would depend on its ability to create a new
hegemony involving a shift in the fantasmatic background that would be reflected in
popular belief and social practice. If possible, a true modernization of social and political
life would thus presuppose a “modernization of fantasy.” Of course, it would also require
addressing the dislocations and injustices involved in modernization and capitalist
globalization and the grievances that find refuge in the security of old fantasies (Psychopedis
2000). Regardless of all the rhetoric, one often detects not only inability but also an
unconscious unwillingness to deal with the construction, negotiation and popular legiti-
mation of a new fantasy, a new social, political and national mythomoteur. Hypotheses
explaining this unwillingness or difficulty include the fear that these old fantasies are still
so strong—albeit in a more implicit way—that living in denial and fantasizing their
silencing or automatic elimination is easier than fighting them face to face, and/or the
fact that although often expressed in an extreme form that many find appalling—as in the
case of the religious/political discourse we are examining—these old fantasies are still
“our own fantasies,” reveal something about our repressed self that is extremely traumatic
to admit and even more difficult to change. On this issue also see Giannoulopoulos 1998.
      35
         See, on this issue, Frazee 1969, and Stavrou 1994, for a first historical account of the
relevant events.
      36
         For more information on the relevant Byzantine arrangements and the socio-
political significance of the church, also see Mango 1994.
      37
         More recent historical research has shown that, although the Ottomans used the
Patriarchate from early on perhaps as a means to control but, most important, to tax the
Christian populations of the Ottoman Empire, the Millet system was not fully institutional-
ized until the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (Kostis 1991:60)
      38
         Before the emergence of nationalism (an Enlightenment ideology), “we can speak
of a Greek cultural or ethnic community [of an ethnie, or at times of weakened self-
consciousness of an ethnic category (Smith 1999:12, 105)] but not of an ancient Greek
‘nation’” (Smith 1991:8). Accordingly, “any attempt to impose contemporary national
categories on the Byzantine world can only lead to a misinterpretation of the facts”
(Mango 1994:6). Here an ethnic community is understood as “a [named] type of cultural
collectivity, one that emphasizes the role of myths of descent and historical memories, and
that is recognized by one or more cultural differences like religion, customs, language or
institutions,” “the product of specific historical forces [not a primordial entity] and . . .
subject to historical change and dissolution” (Smith 1991:20, Smith 1986:32). The
imagined element, stressed by Anderson (Anderson 1991), is also predominant here since
what is important is not any facts of common descent as a shared myth of common descent
(Smith 1991:22). From this point of view, it is irrelevant whether contemporary Greeks
really descent from Ancient or Byzantine Greeks; what is important is that at certain points
such a sense of affinity or descent was constructed or re-constructed: “Such a ‘Greek
revival’ was to surface again in the tenth and fourteenth centuries, as well as subsequently”
(Smith 1991:29). This idea of descent, of a linear historical connection between Ancient
and modern Greece, so crucial for Greek nation building, was eventually “scientifically”
demonstrated by the sciences of historiography, mainly in Paparrigopoulos, and folklore
studies (Skopetea 1988, Politis 1993, Herzfeld 1986).
      39
         However, for the last one thousand years being called a Greek, more precisely a
“Hellene,” was in disrepute and usually meant being a pagan. Things changed when, as we
have already mentioned, “suddenly, in the fourteenth century Byzantine intellectuals
began to speak about themselves as Hellenes” and to refer to a “community of Hellas”
174     Yannis Stavrakakis

(Runciman 1968:119). Others locate this first revival of Hellenism in the eleventh century
(Svoronos 1982:87, 145–161; Yannaras 1992). An exclusionary, nationalist, self-definition
was fully developed under the influence of the Enlightenment and was gradually
disseminated to the whole population of Greece after the establishment of the Greek state
and throughout the nineteenth century. See Skopetea 1988.
      40
         During this whole period, the Church was often torn between its ties with
Hellenism and its more ecumenical role, a tension that became open as soon as secular
nationalism utilized these elements to produce an exclusionary identity that was clearly at
odds with the ecumenical ideal and traditional Byzantine consciousness (Diamandouros
1983:56–57), as well as with the Patriarchate’s role and interests as leader of all Orthodox
populations in the Ottoman Empire. It seems that this was one of the reasons for its
ambivalence towards the Greek revolution (1821) with the higher hierarchy opposing and
condemning it and the lower clergy supporting it—and fighting in the struggle against the
Ottomans (Divani 2001:44), which may also explain the lack of a serious anticlerical
movement in Greece after the revolution (Skopetea 1988:121). This tension seems to be
affecting the discourse of the Greek Church to this date. On the one hand, Archbishop
Christodoulos has often spoken against racism and discrimination (Christodoulos
Sun°nteujh:25), even against nationalism (Christodoulos 1999:37, Christodoulos 2001b),
transmitting an ecumenical message according to which the Church stands higher than
the nation because it is ecumenical, and includes all the people on earth, “all the children
of God” (Christodoulos Ekklhs¤a kai °ynow:10). On the other hand, however, he has
pointed out that “Orthodoxy, beyond its ecumenical character, has been established as a
permanent element of our national identity, while the Byzantine roots of our national
consciousness form the essential framework of our particularity” (Christodoulos 1999:146).
Thus, being Greek equals and can only mean being Christian Orthodox (Christodoulos
1999:146). “The Race [G°now] owes its identity to the Church” (Christodoulos 1999:151)
since “for centuries Orthodoxy and Race have been indistinguishable, and Orthodoxy is
the most durable organic element of Greek continuity” (Christodoulos 1999:173). “Our
nation [°ynow] has been privileged and has received the blessing of God” (Christodoulos
2000a:51). A further trace of the tension is the use of both g°now and °ynow in religious
discourse which refer to distinct forms of collective community—g°now to the pre-modern
ethnic-religious community and °ynow to the community of the nation-state. On these
issues also see Christodoulos 1999:220–1. For a detailed historical account of the two
legacies and their origins, see Sherrard 1973. In translating g°now with “race,” admittedly
not an entirely satisfactory translation, I am taking my lead from Zakythinos 1976:188,
where a detailed account of the two legacies is also to be found: Zakythinos 1976:144–179.
      41
         Most accounts focus very much on the role of Maurer, but it seems that the demand
for an independent Church was widespread even before the arrival of king Otto, although
a more tactful procedure vis-à-vis the Patriarchate might have been followed without the
intervention of Maurer (Conidaris 1996:220). Also see, in this respect, Paparizos, 1991: 67,
and Troianos and Dimakopoulou 1999:13, 121, where important documents of the period
are reproduced.
      42
         In return, the Church hierarchy benefited from privileges and the state flattery,
and priests became “civil servants” to this day being paid by the state. Furthermore, some
Church circles saw in state support the guarantee for the spiritual hegemony of Orthodoxy
in Greece (Lipowatz 1995:174). Regarding the alienating results of these arrangements for
the Church itself, see Yannaras 1983a:74–79, Ramfos 2000, Yannaras 2000, Yannaras
2001:168. Although Christodoulos has managed to bring the Church back to the center of
media attention and public debate, an extraordinary accomplishment in itself, it is
debatable to what extent he is capable of changing a state of decay marking the Church
since then, a state Yannaras has described as follows: “The so-called ‘official’ church looks
                     On the “Politicization” of Greek Church Discourse                   175

as if it is in a state of comatose aphasia, with the Episcopal position the object of power
manipulations . . . the great majority of priests hostages to the professionalization of their
calling and the ecclesiastical schools in a tragic state of collapse” (Yannaras 1992:488).
      43
         It has been argued that, in fact, the Church has been acting as an Ideological State
Apparatus, in the Althusserian sense of the term (Chiotakis 2000:312). Also see Althusser
1990:67–121.
      44
         In a 1997 paper, Stathopoulos himself has proposed “a system of friendly, very
friendly separation” between church and state in Greece (Stathopoulos 2000:59). A variety
of legal steps in this direction is outlined in Konidaris 2000.




                                   REFERENCES CITED

Abercrombie, Nicholas, Stephen Hill, and Bryan Turner
    1988 Dictionary of Sociology, second edition. London: Penguin.
Adams, Arlin and Emmerich, Charles
    1990 A Nation Dedicated to Religious Liberty. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
           Press.
Agouridis, Savvas
    2000 Sãbbaw Agour¤dhw, «H ekklhs¤a vw for°aw ãskhshw ejousiastikÆw drãshw».
            In Idruma Karãgivrga, Dom°w kai sx°seiw ejous¤aw sth shmerinÆ Ellãda.
            Athens.
Ahdar, Rex
    2000 “The Inevitability of Law and Religion: An Introduction.” In Ahdar, Rex (ed.),
           Law and Religion. Dartmouth: Ashgate.
Alivizatos, Nikos
      1983 N¤kow Alibizãtow, «ÜEynowÉ katã ÑlaoÊÉ metã to 1940». In TsaoÊshw,
             DhmÆtrhw (ed.), EllhnismÒw-EllhnikÒthta. Athens: Est¤a.
      1999 “A New Role for the Greek Church?” Journal of Modern Greek Studies, 17:23–39.
      2001a O ab°baiow eksugxronismÒw. Athens: PÒliw.
      2001b «Ya xreiazÒtan yrãsow perissÒ . . .». Ta N°a, 30 August.
Althusser, Louis
     1990 Y°seiw, Athens: Yem°lio.
Anagnostopoulou, Sia
    2000 S¤a AnagnvstopoÊlou, «H istorikÒthta tou “eynikoÊ rÒlou”: °ynow ellhnikÒ
          Æ °ynow ellhnoryÒdojo;». In Idruma Karãgivrga, Dom°w kai sx°seiw
          ejous¤aw sth shmerinÆ Ellãda. Athens.
Anderson, Benedict
    1991 Imagined Communities, revised edition. London: Verso.
Andrianopoulos, Andreas
    2001 Andr°aw AndrianÒpoulow, EllhnismÒw kai oryodoj¤a. Athens: Kãktow.
Armstrong, John
    1982 Nations Before Nationalism. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press.
Beck, Hans–Georg
    2000 H BuzantinÆ xiliet¤a, third edition. Athens: MIET.
176     Yannis Stavrakakis

Bell, David and Byron Criddle
      1988 The French Socialist Party, second edition. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Blumenberg, Hans
    1983 The Legitimacy of the Modern Age. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Chiotakis, Stelios
    2000 St°liow Xivtãkhw, «Oceiw thw ‘neo-oryÒdojhw’ anaparagvgÆw thw
            ‘koinÒthtaw’ (GEMEINSCHAFT)». In ÄIdruma Karãgivrga, Dom°w kai sx°seiw
            ejous¤aw sth shmerinÆ Ellãda. Athens.
Christodoulos, Archbishop
     n.d.    Arxiep¤skopow XristÒdoulow, Ekklhs¤a kai °ynow. Athens: XrusophgÆ.
     n.d.    Sun°nteujh. Athens: XrusophgÆ.
     1999    ApÒ x≈ma kai nerÒ. Athens: Kastani≈thw.
     2000a «PrÒlogow BÉ ekdÒsevw» (Address to the Holy Synod of the Church of
             Greece, 11 October 2000). In Holy Synod 2000.
     2000b «Omil¤a tou MakariÒtatou ArxiepiskÒpou Ayhn≈n kai Pãshw Ellãdow
             XristodoÊlou sthn LaosÊnajh tvn Ayhn≈n». In Holy Synod 2000.
     2001a Interview given to Th. Lalas, Vimagasino, To BÆma, 11 February.
     2001b «PÒnow patr¤dow», Speech at Kalavryta, www.ecclesia.gr/Archbishop
             /Speeches/4-8-2001.html [currently available at http://www.ecclesia.gr
             /greek/Archbishop/ellinismos/4-8-2001.html]
Connolly, William
    1999 Why I Am Not a Secularist. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Crouch, Colin
    2000 “The Quiet Continent: Religion and Politics in Europe.” In Marquand, David
           and Nettler, Ronald (eds), Religion and Democracy. Oxford: Blackwell/The
           Political Quarterly.
Demertzis, Nicos
   1995 “The Place of Religion in Greek Political Culture,” unpublished paper.
   1996 N¤kow DemertzÆw, O LÒgow tou eynikismoÊ. Athens: Sãkkoulaw.
   1996 “La place de la religion dans la culture politique grecque.” In Mappa, Sofia
           (ed.), Puissance et impuissance de l’Etat. Paris: Karthala.
   1997 “Greece.” In Eatwell, Roger (ed.), European Political Cultures: Conflict or
           Convergence? London: Routledge.
Diamandouros, Nikiforos
    1983 NikhfÒrow DiamantoÊrow, «EllhnismÒw kai ellhnikÒthta». In TsaoÊshw,
         DhmÆtrhw (ed.) EllhnismÒw-EllhnikÒthta. Athens: Est¤a.
Dimitrakos, Dimitris
    2000 DhmÆtrhw Dhmhtrãkow «Pvw ya kope¤ o omfãliow l≈row anãmesa sto
            krãtow kai thn ekklhs¤a». To BÆma, 4 June 2000.
Dimitropoulos, Panagiotis
    2001 Panagi≈thw DhmhtrÒpoulow, Ekklhs¤a kai krãtow: Mia dÊskolh sx°sh.
          Athens: KritikÆ.
Divani, Lena
     2000 L°na Dibãnh, H edafikÆ oloklÆrvsh thw Ellãdow (1830–1947). Athens:
           Kastani≈thw.
                    On the “Politicization” of Greek Church Discourse                177

Frazee, Charles
     1969 The Orthodox Church and Independent Greece, 1821–1852. Cambridge: Cambridge
           University Press.
Georgiadou, Vassiliki
    1995 “Greek Orthodoxy and the Politics of Nationalism.” International Journal of
          Politics, Culture and Society 9(2):295–316.
    1996 BasilikÆ Gevrgiãdou, «KosmikÒ krãtow kai oryÒdojh ekklhs¤a: sx°seiw
          yrhske¤aw, koinvn¤aw kai politikÆw sth metapol¤teush». In LurintzÆw,
          XrÆstow, NikolakÒpoulow, Hl¤aw, SvthrÒpoulow, DhmÆtrhw (eds) Koinvn¤a
          kai politikÆ: ÄOceiw thw tr¤thw ellhnikÆw dhmokrat¤aw, 1974–1994. Athens:
          Yem°lio.
Georgiadou, Vassiliki and Ilias Nikolakopoulos
    2000 BasilikÆ Gevrgiãdou kai Hl¤aw NikolakÒpoulow, ‘O laÒw thw ekklhs¤aw’.
          In Bernardãkhw, XristÒforow (ed.) InstitoÊto V-PRC: H koinÆ gn≈mh sthn
          Ellãda, °reunew kai dhmoskopÆseiw, 2001. Athens: N°a SÊnora.
Hasenclever, Andreas and Volker Rittberger
    2000 “Does Religion Make a Difference? Theoretical Approaches to the Impact of
           Faith on Political Conflict.” Millennium 29(3):641–674.
Herzfeld, Michael
    1986 Ours Once More: Folklore, Ideology and the Making of Modern Greece. New York:
           Pella.
Holt, Michael
     1995 The French Wars of Religion, 1562–1629. Cambridge: Cambridge University
           Press.
Holy Synod of the Church of Greece
     2000 Ierã SÊnodow thw Ekklhs¤aw thw Ellãdow, ekklhs¤a kai tautÒthtew,
           Athens: Publications Branch of the Communication and Educational Service
           of the Church of Greece, second edition.
Ian, Marcia
     1999 “Introduction: America the ‘Secular,’” unpublished manuscript.
Ierotheos, Bishop of Nafpaktos
     2000 Ep¤skopow Naupãktou IerÒyeow, “Historical Development of the Inscrip-
            tion of Religion in the Identity Cards of Greek Citizens.” In Holy Synod 2000.
Kalaintzidis, Panayotis
     2001 Panagi≈thw KalaÛntz¤dhw, «O peirasmÒw tou IoÊda», SÊnajh, 79, Ekklhs¤a
             kai °ynow: Desmo¤ kai desmã, 51–65.
Karayannis, Yiorgos
     1997 Gi≈rgow Karagiãnnhw, Ekklhs¤a kai krãtow, 1833–1997. Athens: To Pont¤ki.
Keane, John
    2000 “Secularism?” In Marquand, David, and Nettler, Ronald (eds), Religion and
           Democracy. Oxford: Blackwell/The Political Quarterly.
Keddle, Nikki
    1997 “Secularism and the State: Towards Clarity and Global Comparison.” New Left
           Review, 226:21–40.
178     Yannis Stavrakakis

Kitromilides, Paschalis
     1989 “‘Imagined Communities’ and the Origins of the National Question in the
            Balkans.” European History Quarterly 19(2):149–192.
Kitromilides, Paschalis, Nikos Kokosalakis, Antonis Manitakis, P. Nikolopoulos,
Christos Yannaras, and Stavros Zoumboulakis
     2001 «Ekklhs¤a kai °ynow: Mia suzÆthsh», SÊnajh, 79, Ekklhs¤a kai °ynow:
            Desmo¤ kai desmã, 5–35.
Knapp, Andrew and Vincent Wright
    2001 The Government and Politics of France, fourth edition. London: Routledge.
Konidaris, Ioannis
    1996 Ivãnnhw Konidãrhw, «H g°nesh tou politeÊmatow thw autokefal¤aw thw
            ekklhs¤aw thw Ellãdow». In XrusÒw, Euãggelow (ed.) ÄEnaw n°ow kÒsmow
            genni°tai. Athens: Akr¤taw.
    2000 «H ekkosm¤keush thw polite¤aw». In K¤nhsh polit≈n katã tou ratsismoÊ
            (ed.) YrhskeutikÆ eleuyer¤a kai dhmokrat¤a. Athens: ParaskÆnio.
Kontogiorgis, Georgios
    2000 Ge≈rgiow Kontogi≈rghw, Ierate¤o: H despotikÆ metãllajh thw elladikÆw
           ekklhs¤aw. Athens: epicom.
Kostis, Costas
     1991 K≈staw KvstÆw, «KoinÒthtew, ekklhs¤a kai mil°t stiw ‘ellhnik°w’ periox°w
            thw OyvmanikÆw autokrator¤aw katã thn per¤odo tvn metarruym¤sevn»,
            MnÆmvn, 13:57–75.
Kubalkova, Vendulka
    2000 “Towards an International Political Theology.” Millennium 29(3):675–704.
Lamberts, Emil (ed.)
    1997 Christian Democracy in the European Union. Leuven: Leuven University Press.
Leonardi, Robert and Douglas Wertman
    1989 Italian Christian Democracy. London: Macmillan.
Lind, Michael
     2001 “Which Civilisation?” Prospect, November issue, 22–27.
Lipowatz, Thanos
    1995 Yãnow L¤pobatw, «LÒgow kai y°lhsh ston xristianismÒ», EllhnikÆ
           Epiye≈rhsh PolitikÆw EpistÆmhw, 6:167–180.
Makrides, Vassilios
    1991 “Orthodoxy as a Conditio sine qua non: Religion and State/Politics in Modern
           Greece from a Socio-Historical Perspective.” Oskirchliche Studien 40(4).
    1991 “Aspects of Greek Orthodox Fundamentalism.” Orthodoxes Forum 5:49–72.
Manitakis, Antonis
    2000 Ant≈nhw Manitãkhw, Oi sx°seiw thw ekklhs¤aw me to krãtow-°ynow: Sth
            skiã tvn tautotÆtvn. Athens: Nef°lh.
    2001 «O ‘LaÒw tou YeoÊ’ enãntia ston ‘LaÒ thw Polite¤aw’», O Pol¤thw, 94:7–13.
Mango, Cyril
    1994 Byzantium, The Empire of New Rome. London: Phoenix.
                    On the “Politicization” of Greek Church Discourse               179

Mappa, Sofia
    1997 Sof¤a Mãppa, Oryodoj¤a kai ejous¤a sthn ellhnikÆ koinvn¤a. Athens:
           Ejãntaw.
Martin, David
     1969 The Religious and the Secular. London: Routedge and Kegan Paul.
     1978 A General Theory of Secularisation. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
McConnell, Moira
   2000 “Neutrality, Separation and Accommodation: Tensions in American First
          Amendment Doctrine,” in Ahdar 2000.
Metallinos, Georgios
    2000 Ge≈rgiow MetallhnÒw, Ekklhs¤a kai polite¤a sthn oryÒdojh parãdosh.
            Athens: ArmÒw.
Monsma, Stephen and Soper, J. Christopher
    1997 The Challenge of Pluralism: Church and State in Five Democracies. Maryland:
          Rowman and Littlefield.
Mouzelis, Nicos
    1978 N¤kow Mouz°lhw, NeoellhnikÆ koinvn¤a: ÄOceiw upanãptujhw. Athens:
           Ejãntaw.
    1994 O EynikismÒw sthn Êsterh anãptujh. Athens: Yem°lio.
    1996 “The Concept of Modernization: Its Relevance for Greece.” Journal of Modern
           Greek Studies 14:215–227.
O’Dea, Thomas
    1966 The Sociology of Religion. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Paparizos, Antonis
    1991 Ant≈nhw Papar¤zow, «PolitikÆ kai yrhske¤a sthn Ellãda», Tetrãdia,
            27:63–76.
Pappas, Tassos
    2001 Tãssow Pappãw, OryÒdojow kaisaropapismÒw. Athens: Kãktow.
Petrou, Ioannis
     1999 Ivãnnhw P°trou, «ÄAnyrvpow, krãtow, ekklhs¤a. Problhmatismo¤ gia thn
            anagkaiÒthta n°aw rÊymishw tvn sx°sevn Krãtouw-Ekklhs¤aw», Kay’odÒn,
            15:17–24.
Pinakoulas, Antonios
     2001 Ant≈niow PinakoÊlaw, «Ekklhs¤a kai ellhnismÒw sthn neÒterh Ellãda»,
            SÊnajh, 79, Ekklhs¤a kai °ynow: Desmo¤ kai desmã, 36–50.
Politis, Alexis
      1993 Al°jhw Pol¤thw, Romantikã xrÒnia. Athens: MnÆmvn.
Psychopedis, Kosmas
     2000 Kosmãw Cuxopa¤dhw, «H yeolog¤a tou kakoÊ», Ta N°a, 15 July.
Ramfos, Stelios
    2000 St°liow Rãmfow, «H abãstaxth anasfãleia thw ekklhs¤aw», KayhmerinÆ,
           4 June.
Ravitch, Norman
     1990 The Catholic Church and the French State, 1589–1989. London: Routledge.
180      Yannis Stavrakakis

Remond, Rene
   1999 Religion and Society in Modern Europe. London: Routledge.
Runciman, Steven
    1968 The Great Church in Captivity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rudometov, Victor
    1998 “From Rum Millet to Greek Nation: Enlightenment, Secularisation, and
          National Identity in Ottoman Balkan Society, 1453–1821.” Journal of Modern
          Greek Studies 16(1):11–48.
Sherrard, Philip
     1973 “Church, State and the Greek War of Independence.” In Clogg, Richard (ed.)
           The Struggle for Greek Independence. London: Macmillan.
Skopetea, Elli
    1988 ÄEllh Skopet°a, To ‘PrÒtupo Bas¤leio’ kai h Megãlh Id°a. Athens:
           PolÊtupo.
Smith, Anthony
    1986 The Ethnic Origins of Nations. Oxford: Blackwell.
    1991 National Identity. London: Penguin.
    1999 Myths and Memories of the Nation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sotirelis, Yiorgos
     1999 “Separation Between State and Church: The Revision That Did Not Take
              Place.” In Christopoulos, D. (ed.), Legal Issues of Religious Alterity in Greece.
              Athens: Kritiki.
Spinner-Halev, Jeff
    2000 Surviving Diversity: Religion and Democratic Citizenship. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
           University Press.
Stathopoulos, Michalis
     1993 Mixãlhw StayÒpoulow, Sx°seiw polite¤aw kai ekklhs¤aw. Komotini:
           Sãkkoulaw.
     1999 «H suntagmatikÆ katoxÊrvsh thw yrhskeutikÆw eleuyer¤aw kai oi sx°seiw
           Polite¤aw-Ekklhs¤aw», Kay’odÒn, 15:41–53.
Stavrakakis, Yannis
     1999 “Lacan and History.” Journal for the Psychoanalysis of Culture and Society 4(1):99–
             118.
Stavrou, Theofanis
     1994 “The Orthodox Church and Political Culture in Modern Greece.” In Constas,
           Dimitris and Stavrou, Theofanis (eds), Greece Prepares for the Twenty first Century.
           Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press/The Woodrow Wilson Center
           Press.
Svoronos, Nikos
     1982 N¤kow Sbor≈now, Anãlekta sÊgxronhw ellhnikÆw Istor¤aw kai istoriogra-
           f¤aw. Athens: Yem°lio.
Swatos, William (ed.)
     1998 Encyclopedia of Religion and Society. Walnut Creek: Altamira Press.
                    On the “Politicization” of Greek Church Discourse               181

Thomas, Scott
    2000 “Taking Religious and Cultural Pluralism Seriously: The Global Resurgence of
          Religion and the Transformation of International Society.” Millennium
          29(3):815–841.
Troianos, Spyros and Harikleia Dimakopoulou
     1999 SpÊrow TrvianÒw kai Xar¤kleia DhmakopoÊlou, Ekklhs¤a kai polite¤a.
           Athens: Sãkkoulaw.
Tsatsos, Dimitris
     2000 DhmÆtrhw Tsãtsow, «ApÒ to naÒ sthn agorã», Ta N°a, 26 June.
Venizelos, Evangelos
     2000 Euãggelow Beniz°low, Oi sx°seiw krãtouw kai ekklhs¤aw. Thessaloniki:
            ParathrhtÆw.
Wald, Kenneth
    1992 Religion and Politics in the United States, second edition. Washington: Congres-
          sional Quarterly Press.
Ware, Kallistos
    1983 “The Church: A Time of Transition.” In Clogg, Richard (ed.), Greece in the
            1980s. London: Macmillan.
    1997 The Orthodox Church, new edition. London: Penguin.
Yannaras, Christos
    1983a XrÆstow Giannarãw, To pronÒmio thw apelpis¤aw, second edition. Athens:
             GrhgÒrhw.
    1983b Kefãlaia politikÆw yeolog¤aw, second edition. Athens: GrhgÒrhw.
    1983c «Yrhske¤a kai EllhnikÒthta». In TsaoÊshw, DhmÆtrhw (ed.), EllhnismÒw-
             EllhnikÒthta. Athens: Est¤a.
    1991     Elements of Faith. Edinburgh: T & T Clark.
    1992     Oryodoj¤a kai dÊsh sth ne≈terh Ellãda. Athens: DÒmow.
    2000     «EleÊyerh pt≈sh sto kenÒ», KayhmerinÆ, 4 June.
    2001     H neoellhnikÆ tautÒthta, fourth edition. Athens: GrhgÒrhw.
Zacharopoulos, Nikos
    1999 N¤kow ZaxarÒpoulow, «Krãtow kai ekklhs¤a: Anazht≈ntaw th sx°sh kai
          tiw diafor°w sth shmerinÆ pragmatikÒthta», KayÉodÒn, 15:5–10.
Zakythinos, Dionysios
     1976 The Making of Modern Greece. Oxford: Blackwell.
