Slavoj Žižek

From Politics to Biopolitics . . . and Back




                      In our Western tradition, the exemplary case of
                       a traumatic Real is the Jewish Law. In the Jewish
                       tradition, the divine Mosaic Law is experienced
                       as something externally imposed, contingent,
                       and traumatic—in short, as an impossible/real
                       Thing that ‘‘makes the law.’’ What is arguably the
                       ultimate scene of religious-ideological interpel-
                       lation—the pronouncement of the Decalogue on
                       Mount Sinai—is the very opposite of something
                       that emerges ‘‘organically’’ as the outcome of the
                       path of self-knowing and self-realization. The
                       Judeo-Christian tradition is thus to be strictly
                       opposed to the New Age gnostic problematic of
                       self-realization or self-fulﬁllment: when the Old
                       Testament enjoins you to love and respect your
                       neighbor, this does not refer to your imaginary
                       semblable/double, but to the neighbor qua trau-
                       matic Thing. In contrast to the New Age attitude
                       that ultimately reduces my Other/Neighbor to
                       my mirror image or to the means on the path to
                       self-realization (like the Jungian psychology in
                       which other persons around me are ultimately
                       reduced to the externalizations/projections of
                       the diﬀerent disavowed aspects of my person-
                       ality), Judaism opens up a tradition in which
                       an alien traumatic kernel forever persists in

                       The South Atlantic Quarterly 103:2/3, Spring/Summer 2004.
                       Copyright © 2004 by Duke University Press.
502 Slavoj Žižek



my Neighbor—the Neighbor remains an inert, impenetrable, enigmatic
presence that hystericizes me.
   The Jewish commandment that prohibits images of God is the obverse of
the statement that relating to one’s neighbor is the only terrain of religious
practice, of where the divine dimension is present in our lives—‘‘no images
of God’’ does not point toward a gnostic experience of the divine beyond our
reality, a divine that is beyond any image; on the contrary, it designates a
kind of ethical hic Rhodus, hic salta: You want to be religious? Okay, prove it
here, in the ‘‘works of love,’’ in the way you relate to your neighbors. . . . We
have here a nice case of the Hegelian reversal of reﬂexive determination into
determinate reﬂection: instead of saying ‘‘God is love,’’ we should say ‘‘Love
is divine’’ (and, of course, the point is not to conceive of this reversal as the
standard humanist platitude. It is for this precise reason that Christianity,
far from standing for a regression toward an image of God, only draws the
consequence of the Jewish iconoclasm through asserting the identity of God
and man).
   If, then, the modern topic of human rights is ultimately grounded in this
Jewish notion of the Neighbor as the abyss of Otherness, how did we reach
the weird contemporary negative link between Decalogue (the traumati-
cally imposed divine Commandments) and human rights? That is to say,
within our postpolitical liberal-permissive society, human rights are ulti-
mately, in their innermost, simply the rights to violate the Ten Command-
ments. ‘‘The right to privacy’’—the right to adultery, done in secret, where
no one sees me or has the right to probe into my life. ‘‘The right to pur-
sue happiness and to possess private property’’—the right to steal (to exploit
others). ‘‘Freedom of the press and of the expression of opinion’’—the right
to lie. ‘‘The right of the free citizens to possess weapons’’—the right to kill.
And, ultimately, ‘‘freedom of religious belief ’’—the right to celebrate false
gods.1 Of course, human rights do not directly condone the violation of the
Commandments—the point is just that they keep open a marginal ‘‘gray
zone,’’ which should remain out of reach of (religious or secular) power: in
this shady zone, I can violate the commandments, and if the power probes
into it, catching me with my pants down and trying to prevent my viola-
tions, I can cry, ‘‘Assault on my basic human rights!’’ The point is thus that
it is structurally impossible, for the Power, to draw a clear line of separa-
tion and prevent only the ‘‘misuse’’ of the Right, while not infringing on
the proper use—that is, the use that does not violate the Commandments.
The ﬁrst step in this direction was accomplished by the Christian notion
                                        From Politics to Biopolitics . . . and Back   503



of grace. In Mozart’s La Clemenza di Tito, just before the ﬁnal pardon, Tito
himself is exasperated by the proliferation of treasons that oblige him to
proliferate acts of clemency:
     The very moment that I absolve one criminal, I discover another. / . . . /
     I believe the stars conspire to oblige me, in spite of myself, to become
     cruel. No: they shall not have this satisfaction. My virtue has already
     pledged itself to continue the contest. Let us see, which is more con-
     stant, the treachery of others or my mercy. / . . . / Let it be known to
     Rome that I am the same and that I know all, absolve everyone, and
     forget everything.
One can almost hear Tito complaining: ‘‘Uno per volta, per carita!’’—
‘‘Please, not so fast, one after the other, in the line for mercy!’’ Living up to
his task, Tito forgets everyone, but those whom he pardons are condemned
to remember it forever:
     sextus: It is true, you pardon me, Emperor; but my heart will not
     absolve me; it will lament the error until it no longer has memory.
     titus: The true repentance of which you are capable, is worth more
     than constant ﬁdelity.
This couplet from the ﬁnale blurts out the obscene secret of Clemenza: the
pardon does not really abolish the debt, it rather makes it inﬁnite—we are
forever indebted to the person who pardoned us. No wonder Tito prefers
repentance to ﬁdelity: in ﬁdelity to the Master, I follow him out of respect,
while in repentance, what attaches me to the Master is the inﬁnite indelible
guilt. In this, Tito is a thoroughly Christian master.
   Usually, Judaism is conceived as the religion of the superego (of man’s
subordination to the jealous, mighty, and severe God), in contrast to the
Christian God of Mercy and Love—one opposes the Jewish rigorous Jus-
tice and the Christian Mercy, the inexplicable gesture of undeserved par-
don: we, humans, were born in sin, we cannot ever repay our debts and
redeem ourselves through our own acts—our only salvation lies in God’s
Mercy, in His supreme sacriﬁce. However, in this very gesture of break-
ing the chain of Justice through the inexplicable act of Mercy, of paying
our debt, Christianity imposes on us an even stronger debt: we are forever
indebted to Christ, we cannot ever repay him for what he did for us. The
Freudian name for such an excessive pressure that we cannot ever remu-
nerate is, of course, superego. It is precisely through not demanding from
504 Slavoj Žižek



us the price for our sins, through paying this price for us Himself, that the
Christian God of Mercy establishes itself as the supreme superego agency:
I paid the highest price for your sins, and you are thus indebted to me for-
ever. Is this God as the superego agency, whose very Mercy generates the
indelible guilt of believers, the ultimate horizon of Christianity? One should
eﬀectively correlate the unconditional guilt of superego and the mercy of
love—two ﬁgures of excess, the excess of guilt without proportion to what I
eﬀectively did, and the excess of mercy without proportion to what I deserve
on account of my acts.
   As such, the dispensation of mercy is the most eﬃcient constituent of
the exercise of power. That is to say, Is the relationship between law (legal
justice) and mercy really the one between necessity and choice? Is it really
that one has to obey the law, while mercy is by deﬁnition dispensed as a
free and excessive act, as something that the agent of mercy is free to do or
not to do—mercy under compulsion is no mercy but, at its best, a travesty
of mercy? What if, at a deeper level, the relationship is the opposite one?
What if, with regard to law, we have the freedom to choose (to obey or violate
it)? While mercy is obligatory, we have to display it—mercy is an unneces-
sary excess that, as such, has to occur. (And does the law not always take
into account this freedom of ours, not only by punishing us for its trans-
gression, but by providing escapes to being punished by its ambiguity and
inconsistency?) Is it not that showing mercy is the only way for a Master to
demonstrate his supralegal authority? If a Master were merely to guaran-
tee the full application of the law, of legal regulations, he would be deprived
of his authority and turn into a mere ﬁgure of knowledge, the agent of the
discourse of university. (This is why even a great judge is a Master ﬁgure:
he always somehow twists the law in its application by way of interpreting
it creatively.) This goes even for Stalin himself, a ﬁgure we deﬁnitely do not
associate with mercy: one should never forget that, as the (now-available)
minutes of the meetings of the Politburo and Central Committee (CC) from
the 1930s demonstrate, Stalin’s direct interventions, as a rule, displayed
mercy. When younger CC members, eager to prove their revolutionary fer-
vor, demanded instant death penalty for Bukharin, Stalin always intervened
and said ‘‘Patience! His guilt is not yet proven!’’ or something similar. Of
course this was a hypocritical attitude—Stalin was well aware that he him-
self generated the destructive fervor, that the younger members were eager
to please him—but, nonetheless, the appearance of mercy is necessary here.
   We encounter the same ‘‘unity of opposites’’ in the new capitalist ethics,
where the ruthless pursuit of proﬁt is counteracted by charity: charity is,
                                       From Politics to Biopolitics . . . and Back   505



today, part of the game: it serves as a humanitarian mask hiding the under-
lying economic exploitation. In a superego blackmail of gigantic propor-
tions, the developed countries are constantly ‘‘helping’’ the undeveloped
(with aid, credits, and so on), thereby avoiding the key issue, namely, their
complicity in and coresponsibility for the miserable situation of the unde-
veloped. Which discursive shift underlies this new form of domination?
   Lacan provides the answer in L’envers de la psychanalyse, his Seminar XVII
(1969–1970) on the four discourses, Lacan’s response to the events of
1968—its premise is best captured in his reversal of the well-known anti-
structuralist graﬃti from the Paris walls of 1968, ‘‘Structures do not walk
on the streets!’’—if anything, this seminar endeavors to demonstrate how
structures do walk on the streets, that is, how structural shifts can account
for the social outbursts like that of 1968. Instead of the one symbolic Order
with its set of a priori rules that guarantee social cohesion, we get the matrix
of the passages from one to another discourse: Lacan’s interest is focused
on the passage from the discourse of the Master to the discourse of the
university as the hegemonic discourse in contemporary society. No won-
der that the revolt was located at the universities: as such, it merely sig-
naled the shift to the new forms of domination in which the scientiﬁc dis-
course serves to legitimize the relations of domination. Lacan’s underlying
premise is skeptic-conservative—Lacan’s diagnosis is best captured by his
famous retort to the student revolutionaries: ‘‘As hysterics, you demand a
new master. You will get it!’’ This passage can also be conceived in more
general terms, as the passage from the prerevolutionary ancien régime to
the postrevolutionary new Master who does not want to admit that he is
one, but proposes himself as a mere ‘‘servant’’ of the People—in Nietzsche’s
terms, it is simply the passage from Master’s ethics to slave morality, and
this fact, perhaps, enables a new approach to Nietzsche: when Nietzsche
scornfully dismisses ‘‘slave morality,’’ he is not attacking lower classes as
such, but, rather, the new masters who are no longer ready to assume the
title of the Master—slave is Nietzsche’s term for a fake master. How, then,
more closely, are we to read the University Discourse?
     S2 b a
     — —
     S1 a $
The University Discourse is enunciated from the position of ‘‘neutral’’
Knowledge; it addresses the remainder of the real (say, in the case of peda-
gogical knowledge, the ‘‘raw, uncultivated child’’), turning it into the sub-
506 Slavoj Žižek



ject ($). The ‘‘truth’’ of the University Discourse, hidden beneath the bar, of
course, is power, that is, the Master-Signiﬁer: the constitutive lie of the Uni-
versity Discourse is that it disavows its performative dimension, presenting
what eﬀectively amounts to a political decision based on power as a simple
insight into the factual state of things. What one should avoid here is the
Foucauldian misreading: the produced subject is not simply the subjectivity
that arises as the result of the disciplinary application of knowledge-power,
but its remainder, that which eludes the grasp of knowledge-power. Pro-
duction (the fourth term in the matrix of discourses) does not stand for the
result of the discursive operation, but rather for its ‘‘indivisible remainder,’’
for the excess that resists being included in the discursive network—that is,
for what the discourse itself produces as the foreign body in its very heart.
   Perhaps the exemplary case of the Master’s position that underlies the
University Discourse is the way in which medical discourse functions in our
everyday lives: at the surface level, we are dealing with pure objective knowl-
edge, which desubjectivizes the subject-patient, reducing him to an object
of research, of diagnosis and treatment; however, beneath it, one can easily
discern a worried hystericized subject, obsessed with anxiety, addressing
the doctor as his Master and asking for reassurance from him. At a more
common level, suﬃce it to recall the market expert who advocates strong
budgetary measures (cutting welfare expenses, and the like.) as a necessity
imposed by his neutral expertise devoid of any ideological biases: what he
conceals is the series of power relations (from the active role of state appa-
ratuses to ideological beliefs) that sustain the ‘‘neutral’’ functioning of the
market mechanism.
   In the University Discourse, is not the upper level ($—a) that of bio-
politics (in the sense deployed from Foucault to Agamben)? Of the expert
knowledge dealing with its object which is a—not subjects, but individuals
reduced to bare life? And does the lower not designate what Eric Santner
called the ‘‘crisis of investiture’’—the impossibility of the subject to relate to
S1, to identify with a Master-Signiﬁer, to assume the imposed symbolic man-
date? 2 The key point here is that the expert rule of ‘‘biopolitics’’ is grounded
in and conditioned by the crisis of investiture; this crisis generated the
‘‘postmetaphysical’’ survivalist stance of the Last Men, which ends up in an
anemic spectacle of life dragging on as its own shadow. It is within this
horizon that one should appreciate today’s growing rejection of the death
penalty: what one should be able to discern is the hidden ‘‘biopolitics’’ that
sustains this rejection. Those who assert the ‘‘sacredness of life,’’ defend-
                                        From Politics to Biopolitics . . . and Back   507



ing it against the threat of transcendent powers that parasitize on it, end
up in a world in which, on behalf of its very oﬃcial goal—long pleasurable
life—all eﬀective pleasures are prohibited or strictly controlled (smoking,
drugs, food, etc.). Spielberg’s Saving Private Ryan is the latest example of
this survivalist attitude toward dying, with its ‘‘demystifying’’ presentation
of war as a meaningless slaughter which nothing can really justify—as such,
it provides the best possible justiﬁcation for Colin Powell’s ‘‘no-casualties-
on-our-side’’ military doctrine.
   In today’s market, we ﬁnd a whole series of products deprived of their
malignant property: coﬀee without caﬀeine, cream without fat, beer with-
out alcohol. And the list goes on: what about virtual sex as sex without sex,
the Colin Powell doctrine of war with no casualties (on our side, of course)
as war without warfare, the contemporary redeﬁnition of politics as the art
of expert administration as politics without politics, up to today’s tolerant
liberal multiculturalism as an experience of Other deprived of its Otherness
(the idealized Other who dances fascinating dances and has an ecologically
sound holistic approach to reality, while features like wife-beating remain
out of sight)? Virtual Reality simply generalizes this procedure of oﬀering
a product deprived of its substance: it provides reality itself deprived of its
substance, of the resisting hard kernel of the Real—in the same way decaf-
feinated coﬀee smells and tastes like real coﬀee without being real, Virtual
Reality is experienced as reality without being one.
   Is this not the attitude of the hedonistic Last Man? Everything is per-
mitted, you can enjoy everything, but deprived of the substance that makes
it dangerous. (This is also the Last Man’s revolution—‘‘revolution without
revolution.’’) Is this not one of the two versions of Lacan’s anti-Dostoyevsky
motto, ‘‘If God doesn’t exist, everything is prohibited’’: 1) God is dead, we live
in a permissive universe, you should strive for pleasures and happiness—
but, in order to have a life full of happiness and pleasures, you should avoid
dangerous excesses, so everything is prohibited if it is not deprived of its
substance; 2) If God is dead, superego enjoins you to enjoy, but every deter-
minate enjoyment is already a betrayal of the unconditional one, so it should
be prohibited. The nutritive version of this is to enjoy directly the Thing
Itself: Why bother with coﬀee? Inject caﬀeine directly into your blood! Why
bother with sensual perceptions and excitations by external reality? Take
drugs that directly aﬀect your brain! And if there is God, then everything
is permitted—to those who claim to act directly on behalf of God, as the
instruments of His will; clearly, a direct link to God justiﬁes our violation of
508 Slavoj Žižek



any ‘‘merely human’’ constraints and considerations (as in Stalinism, where
the reference to the big Other of historical Necessity justiﬁes absolute ruth-
lessness).
    Today’s hedonism combines pleasure with constraint—it is no longer the
old notion of the ‘‘right measure’’ between pleasure and constraint, but a
kind of pseudo-Hegelian immediate coincidence of the opposites: action
and reaction should coincide, the very thing that causes damage should
already be the medicine. The ultimate example of it is arguably a chocolate
laxative, available in the United States, with the paradoxical injunction to eat
more chocolate—the very thing that causes constipation—to alleviate con-
stipation. Do we not ﬁnd here a weird version of Wagner’s famous ‘‘Only
the spear which caused the wound can heal it’’ from Parsifal? And is not
a negative proof of the hegemony of this stance the fact that true uncon-
strained consumption (in all its main forms: drugs, sex, smoking, etc.) is
emerging as the main danger? The ﬁght against these dangers is one of the
main investments of today’s ‘‘biopolitics.’’ Solutions are desperately sought
that would reproduce the paradox of the chocolate laxative. The main con-
tender is safe sex, a phrase that makes one appreciate the truth of the saying,
‘‘Is having sex with a condom not like taking a shower with a raincoat on?’’
The ultimate goal here would be along the lines of decaf coﬀee, to invent
‘‘opium without opium’’: no wonder marijuana is so popular among liberals
who want to legalize it—it already is a kind of ‘‘opium without opium.’’
    The structure of a product containing the agent of its own containment
can be discerned throughout today’s ideological landscape. There are two
topics that determine today’s liberal tolerant attitude toward Others: the
respect of Otherness, openness toward it, and the obsessive fear of harass-
ment—in short, the Other is okay insofar as its presence is not intrusive,
insofar as the Other is not really Other. This is emerging as the central
‘‘human right’’ in late-capitalist society: the right not to be harassed, to be
kept at a safe distance from others. A similar structure is clearly present
in how we relate to capitalist proﬁteering: it is okay if it is counteracted
with charitable activities—ﬁrst you amass billions, then you return (part of )
them to the needy. And the same goes for war, for the emergeng logic of
humanitarian or paciﬁst militarism: war is okay insofar as it really serves
to bring about peace, democracy, or to create conditions for distributing
humanitarian help. And does not the same hold true even for democracy
and human rights? It is okay if human rights are ‘‘rethought’’ to include
torture and a permanent emergency state, if democracy is cleansed of its
populist ‘‘excesses.’’
                                       From Politics to Biopolitics . . . and Back   509



   However, what I am describing cannot but appear as two opposite ideo-
logical spaces: that of the reduction of humans to bare life, to homo sacer
as the disponible object of the expert caretaking knowledge; and that of
the respect for the vulnerable Other brought to an extreme, of the attitude
of narcissistic subjectivity that experiences itself as vulnerable, constantly
exposed to a multitude of potential ‘‘harassments.’’ Is there a stronger con-
trast than the one between the respect for the Other’s vulnerability and
the reduction of the Other to ‘‘mere life’’ regulated by the administrative
knowledge?
   But what if these two stances nonetheless rely on the same root, what
if they are the two aspects of one and the same underlying attitude, what
if they coincide in what one is tempted to designate as the contemporary
case of the Hegelian ‘‘inﬁnite judgement,’’ which asserts the identity of
opposites? What the two poles share is precisely the underlying refusal
of any higher Causes, the notion that the ultimate goal of our lives is life
itself. Nowhere is the complicity of these two levels clearer as in the case
of the opposition to the death penalty—no wonder, since (violently putting
another human being to) death is, quite logically, the ultimate traumatic
point of biopolitics, the politics of the administration of life. To put it in
Foucauldian terms, is the abolition of the death penalty not part of a certain
biopolitics that considers crime as the result of social, psychological, ideo-
logical, and like circumstances: the notion of the morally/legally respon-
sible subject is an ideological ﬁction whose function is to cover up the net-
work of power relations; individuals are not responsible for the crimes they
commit, so they should not be punished? Is, however, the obverse of this
thesis not that those who control the circumstances control the people? No
wonder the two strongest industrial complexes today are the military and
the medical, that of destroying and that of prolonging life.
   Superego is thus not directly S2; it is rather the S1 of the S2 itself, the
dimension of an unconditional injunction that is inherent to knowledge
itself. Recall the messages about health we are bombarded with all the time:
‘‘Smoking is dangerous! Too much fat may cause a heart attack! Regular
exercise leads to a longer life!’’ and so on, and so on. It is impossible not
to hear beneath it the unconditional injunction, ‘‘You should enjoy a long
and healthy life!’’ What this means is that the discourse of the university
is thoroughly mystifying, concealing its true foundation, obfuscating the
unfreedom on which it relies.
   Within this horizon, the concept of radical, ‘‘irrepresentable’’ Evil, be it
holocaust or gulag, plays the central role, that of the constitutive limit and
510   Slavoj Žižek



point of reference of today’s predominant notion of democracy: democracy
means avoiding the ‘‘totalitarian’’ extreme; it is deﬁned as a permanent
struggle against the ‘‘totalitarian’’ temptation to close the gap, to (pretend
to) act on behalf of the Thing Itself. Ironically, it is thus as if one should
turn around the well-known Augustinian notion of Evil as having no posi-
tive substance or force of its own, but being just the absence of Good: Good
itself is the absence of Evil, the distance toward the Evil Thing.
   It is this liberal blackmail of dismissing every radical political act as
evil that one should thoroughly reject—even when it is coated in Lacan-
ian colors, as is the case in Ioannis Stavrakakis’s recent critical reply to my
reading of Antigone, which focuses on the danger of what he calls the ‘‘abso-
lutization’’ of the event, which then leads to a totalitarian desastre. When
Stavrakakis writes that ‘‘ﬁdelity to an event can ﬂourish and avoid absolu-
tization only as an inﬁdel ﬁdelity, only within the framework of another
ﬁdelity, ﬁdelity to the openness of the political space and to the awareness
of the constitutive impossibility of a ﬁnal suture of the social,’’ he thereby
surreptitiously introduces a diﬀerence, which can be given diﬀerent names,
between the unconditional-ethical and the pragmatico-political: the origi-
nal fact is the lack, opening, which pertains to human ﬁnitude, and all posi-
tive acts always fall short of this primordial lack; we have thus what Derrida
calls the unconditional ethical injunction, impossible to fulﬁll, and positive
acts, interventions, which remain strategic interventions. One should evoke
two arguments against this position:
   First, ‘‘Acts’’ in Lacan’s sense precisely suspend this gap—they are ‘‘impos-
sible’’ not in the sense of ‘‘impossible to happen,’’ but in the sense of ‘‘impos-
sible that happened.’’ This is why Antigone was of interest to me: her act is
not a strategic intervention that maintains the gap toward the impossible
Void—it rather tends to ‘‘absolutely’’ enact the Impossible. I am well aware
of the ‘‘lure’’ of such an act, but I claim that, in Lacan’s later versions of the
act, this moment of ‘‘madness’’ beyond strategic intervention remains. In
this precise sense, the notion of act not only does not contradict the ‘‘lack
in the Other,’’ which, according to Stavrakakis, I neglect; it directly presup-
poses it: it is only through an act that I eﬀectively assume the big Other’s
inexistence, that is, I enact the impossible, namely what appears as impos-
sible within the coordinates of the existing sociosymbolic order.
   Second, there are (also) political acts: politics cannot be reduced to the
level of strategic-pragmatic interventions. In a radical political act, the oppo-
sition between a ‘‘crazy’’ destructive gesture and a strategic political decision
                                          From Politics to Biopolitics . . . and Back   511



momentarily breaks down—which is why it is theoretically and politically
wrong to oppose strategic political acts, as risky as they can be, to radical
‘‘suicidal’’ gestures à la Antigone, gestures of pure self-destructive ethical
insistence with, apparently, no political goal. The point is not simply that,
once we are thoroughly engaged in a political project, we are ready to put
everything at stake for it, inclusive of our lives, but, more precisely, that
only such an ‘‘impossible’’ gesture of pure expenditure can change the very coordi-
nates of what is strategically possible within a historical constellation. This is the
key point: an act is neither a strategic intervention into the existing order,
nor its ‘‘crazy’’ destructive negation; an act is an ‘‘excessive,’’ transstrategic,
intervention that redeﬁnes the rules and contours of the existing order.
   So what about the reproach that Antigone not only risks death or sus-
pends symbolic order—my determination of a political act—but that she
actively strives for death, for symbolic and real death, thereby displaying
a purity of desire beyond any sociopolitical transformative action? First, is
Antigone’s act really outside politics, ‘‘apolitical’’? Is not her deﬁance of the
order of the supreme power (Creon, who acts on behalf of the common
good) political, albeit in a negative way? Is not, in certain extreme circum-
stances, such ‘‘apolitical’’ deﬁance on behalf of ‘‘decency’’ or ‘‘old customs’’
even the very model of heroic political resistance? Second, her gesture is
not simply pure desire for death—to do that, she could have directly killed
herself and spared the people around her all the fuss . . . hers was not a pure
symbolic striving for death, but an unconditional insistence on a particular
symbolic ritual.
   And this brings us to the key dilemma: the reference to democracy in-
volves the rejection of the radical attempts to ‘‘step outside,’’ to risk a radi-
cal break, to pursue the trend of self-organized collectives in areas out-
side the law. Arguably the greatest literary monument to such a utopia
comes from an unexpected source—Mario Vargas Llosa’s The War of the
End of the World (1981), the novel about Canudos, an outlaw community
deep in the Brazilian backlands that was home to prostitutes, freaks, beg-
gars, bandits, and the most wretched of the poor. Canudos, led by an apoca-
lyptic prophet, was a utopian space without money, property, taxes, and
marriage. In 1897, it was destroyed by the military forces of the Brazil-
ian government. The echoes of Canudos are clearly discernible in today’s
favelas in Latin American megalopolises: Are they, in some sense, not the
ﬁrst ‘‘liberated territories,’’ the cells of futural self-organized societies? Are
institutions like community kitchens not a model of ‘‘socialized’’ commu-
512   Slavoj Žižek



nal local life? The Canudos liberated territory in Bahia will remain for-
ever the model of a liberated space, of an alternative community that thor-
oughly negates the existing state space. Everything is to be endorsed here,
up to the religious ‘‘fanaticism.’’ It is as if, in such communities, the Ben-
jaminian other side of the historical Progress, the defeated ones, acquires a space
of its own. Utopia existed here for a brief period of time—this is the only
way to account for the ‘‘irrational,’’ excessive, violence of the destruction of
these communities (in 1897 Brazil, all inhabitants of Canudos, children and
women included, were slaughtered, as if the very memory of the possibility
of freedom had to be erased—and this by a government that presented itself
as ‘‘progressive’’ liberal-democratic-republican.) Until now, such communi-
ties exploded from time to time as passing phenomena, a site of eternity that
interrupted the ﬂow of temporal progress—one should have the courage to
recognize them in the wide span from the Jesuit reduciones in eighteenth-
century Paraguay (brutally destroyed by the joint action of Spanish and Por-
tuguese armies) up to the settlements controlled by Sendero Luminoso in
1990s Peru. There is a will to accomplish the ‘‘leap of faith’’ and step out of
the global circuit that is at work here, the will whose extreme and terrify-
ing expression is the well-known accident from the Vietnam war: after the
United States Army occupied a local village, their doctors vaccinated the
children on their left arm in order to demonstrate their humanitarian care;
when, a day later, the village was retaken by the Vietcong, they cut oﬀ the
left arm of all vaccinated children. Although diﬃcult to sustain as a literal
model to follow, this thorough rejection of the Enemy precisely in its help-
ing ‘‘humanitarian’’ aspect, no matter what the costs, has to be endorsed
in its basic intention. In a similar way, when Sendero Luminoso took over
a village, they did not focus on killing the soldiers or policemen stationed
there, but more on the UN or U.S. agricultural consultants or health workers
trying to help the local peasants—after lecturing them for hours and then
forcing them to confess publicly their complicity with imperialism, the Sen-
dero Luminoso shot them. Brutal as this procedure was, it was sustained
by the correct insight: they, not the police or the army, were the true dan-
ger, the enemy at its most perﬁdious, since they were ‘‘lying in the guise of
truth’’—the more they were ‘‘innocent’’ (they ‘‘really’’ tried to help the peas-
ants), the more they served as a tool of the United States. It is only such a
strike against the enemy at his best, at the point where the enemy ‘‘indeed
helps us,’’ that displays a true revolutionary autonomy and ‘‘sovereignty’’ (to
use this term in its Bataillean meaning). If one adopts the attitude of ‘‘let
                                        From Politics to Biopolitics . . . and Back   513



us take from the enemy what is good and reject or even ﬁght against what
is bad,’’ one is already caught in the liberal trap of ‘‘humanitarian help.’’
   Since today capitalism deﬁnes and structures the totality of the human
civilization, every ‘‘Communist’’ territory was and is—again, in spite of its
horrors and failures—a kind of ‘‘liberated territory,’’ as Fred Jameson put
it apropos of Cuba. What we are dealing with here is the old structural
notion of the gap between the Space and the positive content that ﬁlls it in:
although, as to their positive content, the Communist regimes were mostly
a dismal failure, generating terror and misery, at the same time they opened
up a certain space, the space of utopian expectations, which, among other
things, enabled us to measure the failure of the really existing Socialism
itself. (What the anti-Communist dissidents as a rule tend to overlook is
that the very space from which they themselves criticized and denounced
the everyday terror and misery was opened and sustained by the Commu-
nist breakthrough, by its attempt to escape the logic of the Capital.) This
is how one should understand Alain Badiou’s mieux vaut un desastre qu’un
desetre, so shocking for the liberal sensitivity: better the worse Stalinist ter-
ror than the most liberal capitalist democracy. Of course, the moment one
compares the positive content of the two, the Welfare State capitalist democ-
racy is incomparably better—what redeems the Stalinist ‘‘totalitarianism’’ is
the formal aspect, the space it opens up. Can one imagine a utopian point at
which this subterranean level of the utopian Other Space would unite with
the positive space of ‘‘normal’’ social life? The key political question is here:
Is there in our ‘‘postmodern’’ time still a space for such communities? Are
they limited to the undeveloped outskirts (favelas, ghettos), or is a space for
them emerging in the very heart of the ‘‘postindustrial’’ landscape? Can one
make a wild wager that the dynamics of ‘‘postmodern’’ capitalism with its
rise of new eccentric geek communities provides a new chance here, that,
perhaps for the ﬁrst time in history, the logic of alternative communities
can be grafted onto the latest state of technology?
   The main form of such alternative communities in the twentieth century
were so-called councils (‘‘soviets’’)—(almost) everybody in the West loved
them, up to liberals like Hannah Arendt who perceived in them the echo of
the old Greek life of polis. Throughout the age of the Really Existing Social-
ism (RES), the secret hope of ‘‘democratic socialists’’ was the direct democ-
racy of the ‘‘soviets,’’ the local councils as the form of self-organization of
the people; and it is deeply symptomatic how, with the decline of RES,
this emancipatory shadow that haunted it all the time also disappeared. Is
514   Slavoj Žižek



this not the ultimate conﬁrmation of the fact that the council version of
‘‘democratic socialism’’ was just a spectral double of the ‘‘bureaucratic’’ RES,
its inherent transgression with no substantial positive content of its own,
unable to serve as the permanent basic organizing principle of a society?
What both RES and council democracy shared is the belief in the possi-
bility of a self-transparent organization of society that would preclude politi-
cal ‘‘alienation’’ (state apparatuses, institutionalized rules of political life,
legal order, police, and so on—and is the basic experience of the end of RES
not precisely the rejection of this shared feature, the resigned ‘‘postmodern’’
acceptance of the fact that society is a complex network of ‘‘subsystems,’’
which is why a certain level of ‘‘alienation’’ is constitutive of social life, so
that a totally self-transparent society is a utopia with totalitarian potentials? 3
(In this sense, it is Habermas who is ‘‘postmodern,’’ in contrast to Adorno
who, in spite of all his political compromises, to the end remained attached
to a radically utopian vision of revolutionary redemption.)
   Are, however, things really so simple? First, direct democracy is not only
still alive in many places like favelas, it is even being ‘‘reinvented’’ and
given a new boost by the rise of the ‘‘postindustrial’’ digital culture (do the
descriptions of the new ‘‘tribal’’ communities of computer hackers not often
evoke the logic of councils democracy?). Second, the awareness that poli-
tics is a complex game in which a certain level of institutional alienation
is irreducible should not lead us to ignore the fact that there is still a line
of separation that divides those who are ‘‘in’’ from those who are ‘‘out,’’
excluded from the space of the polis—there are citizens, and there is the
specter of homo sacer haunting them all. In other words, even the ‘‘complex’’
contemporary societies still rely on the basic divide between included and
excluded. The fashionable notion of ‘‘multitude’’ is insuﬃcient precisely
insofar as it cuts across this divide: there is a multitude within the system
and the multitude of those excluded, and to simply encompass them within
the scope of the same notion amounts to the same obscenity as equating
starvation with dieting. And those excluded do not simply dwell in a psy-
chotic nonstructured Outside—they have (and are forced into) their own
self-organization, one of the names (and practices) of which was precisely
the council democracy.
   But should we still call it democracy? At this point, it is crucial to avoid
what one cannot but call the ‘‘democratic trap.’’ Many ‘‘radical’’ leftists accept
the legalistic logic of ‘‘transcendental guarantee’’: they refer to democracy
as the ultimate guarantee of those who are aware that there is no guarantee.
                                      From Politics to Biopolitics . . . and Back   515



That is to say, since no political act can claim a direct foundation in some
transcendent ﬁgure of the big Other (of the ‘‘we are just instruments of a
higher Necessity or Will’’ type), since every such act involves the risk of a
contingent decision, nobody has the right to impose his choice on others—
which means that every collective choice has to be democratically legiti-
mized. From this perspective, democracy is not so much the guarantee of
the right choice as a kind of opportunistic insurance against possible fail-
ure: if things turn out wrong, I can always say we are all responsible. Conse-
quently, this last refuge must be dropped; one should fully assume the risk.
The only adequate position is the one advocated already by Lukacs in his His-
tory and Class Consciousness: democratic struggle should not be fetishized;
it is one of the forms of struggle, and its choice should be determined by a
global strategic assessment of circumstances, not by its ostensibly superior
intrinsic value. Like the Lacanian analyst, a political agent has to commit
acts that can only be authorized by himself, for which there is no external
guarantee.
    An authentic political act can be, as to its form, a democratic one as
well as a nondemocratic one. There are some elections or referendums in
which ‘‘the impossible happens’’—recall, decades ago in Italy, a referendum
on divorce where, to the great surprise also of the Left which distrusted
the people, the prodivorce side convincingly won, so that even the Left,
privately skeptical, was ashamed of its distrust. (There were elements of
the event even in the unexpected ﬁrst electoral victory of Francois Mitte-
rand.) It is only in such cases that one is justiﬁed in saying that, beyond
and above the mere numeral majority, people eﬀectively have spoken in a
substantial sense of the term. On the other hand, an authentic act of popu-
lar will can also occur in the form of a violent revolution, of a progres-
sive military dictatorship, and so on. In this precise sense, Khrushchev’s
1956 speech denouncing Stalin’s crimes was a true political act—as William
Taubman put it, after this speech, ‘‘the Soviet regime never fully recovered,
and neither did he.’’ 4 Although the opportunist motives for this daring move
are plain enough, there was clearly more than mere calculation to it, a kind
of reckless excess that cannot be accounted for by strategic reasoning. After
this speech, things were never the same again, the fundamental dogma of
the infallible leadership was undermined, so no wonder that, as a reaction
to the speech, the entire nomenklatura sank into temporary paralysis.
    The present crisis thus compels us to rethink democracy itself as today’s
Master-Signiﬁer. Democracy is not merely the ‘‘power of, by, and for the
516   Slavoj Žižek



people.’’ It is not enough just to claim that, in democracy, the will and
interests (the two in no way automatically coincide) of the large majority
determine the state decisions. Democracy—in the way this term is used
today—concerns, above all, formal legalism: its minimal deﬁnition is the
unconditional adherence to a certain set of formal rules which guaran-
tee that antagonisms are fully absorbed into the agonistic game. Democ-
racy means that, whatever electoral manipulation took place, every political
agent will unconditionally respect the results. In this sense, the U.S. presi-
dential elections of 2000 were eﬀectively democratic: in spite of obvious
electoral manipulations, and of the patent meaninglessness of the fact that
a couple hundred Floridian voices will determine who will be president,
the Democratic candidate accepted his defeat. In the weeks of uncertainty
after the elections, Bill Clinton made an appropriate acerbic comment: ‘‘The
American people have spoken; we just don’t know what they said.’’ This
comment should be taken more seriously than it was meant: even now, we
don’t know it—and, maybe, because there was no substantial ‘‘message’’
behind the result at all.
   Those old enough still remember the boring attempts of ‘‘democratic
Socialists’’ to oppose to the miserable RES the vision of authentic social-
ism—to such attempts, the standard Hegelian answer is quite suﬃcient:
the failure of reality to live up to its notion always bears witness to the inher-
ent weakness of this notion itself. But why should the same also not hold
for democracy itself ? Is it also not all too simple to oppose to the ‘‘really-
existing’’ liberal capitalo-democracy a more true ‘‘radical’’ democracy?
   Interestingly enough, there is at least one case in which formal demo-
crats themselves (or, at least, a substantial part of them) would tolerate the
suspension of democracy: What if the formally free elections are won by
an antidemocratic party whose platform promises the abolition of formal
democracy? (This did happen, among other places, in Algeria a couple of
years ago.) In such a case, many a democrat would concede that the people
were not yet ‘‘mature’’ enough to be allowed democracy, and that some kind
of enlightened despotism whose aim will be to educate the majority into
proper democrats is preferable. A crucial component of any populism is also
the dismissal of the formal democratic procedure: even if these rules are still
respected, it is always made clear that they do not provide the crucial legiti-
macy to political agents—populism rather evokes the direct pathetic link
between the charismatic leadership and the crowd, veriﬁed through plebi-
scites and mass gatherings. Consequently, it seems politically much more
                                        From Politics to Biopolitics . . . and Back   517



productive and theoretically much more adequate to limit ‘‘democracy’’ to
the translation of antagonism into agonism: while democracy acknowl-
edges the irreducible plurality of interests, ideologies, narratives, and the
like, it excludes those who, as we put it, reject the democratic rules of the
game—liberal democrats are quite right in claiming that populism is inher-
ently ‘‘antidemocratic.’’
   This is the sense in which one should render problematic democracy:
Why should the Left always and unconditionally respect the formal demo-
cratic ‘‘rules of the game’’? Why should it not, in some circumstances, at
least, put in question the legitimacy of the outcome of a formal democratic
procedure? All democratic leftists venerate Rosa Luxembourg’s famous
‘‘Freedom is freedom for those who think diﬀerently.’’ Perhaps, the time has
come to shift the accent from ‘‘diﬀerently’’ to ‘‘think’’: ‘‘Freedom is freedom
for those who think diﬀerently’’—only for those who really think, even if dif-
ferently, not for those who just blindly (unthinkingly) act out their opinions.
In his famous short poem ‘‘The Solution’’ from 1953 (published in 1956),
Bertolt Brecht mocks the arrogance of the Communist nomenklatura when
faced with the workers’ revolt:
     After the uprising of the 17th June
     The Secretary of the Writers Union
     Had leaﬂets distributed in the Stalinallee
     Stating that the people
     Had forfeited the conﬁdence of the government
     And could win it back only
     By redoubled eﬀorts.
     Would it not be easier
     In that case for the government
     To dissolve the people and elect another? 5
However, this poem is not only politically opportunistic, the obverse of
his letter of solidarity with the East German Communist regime published
in Neues Deutschland—to put it brutally, Brecht wanted to cover both his
ﬂanks, to profess his support for the regime as well as to hint at his solidarity
with the workers, so that whoever wins, he will be on the winning side—
but also simply wrong in the theoretico-political sense: one should bravely
admit that it eﬀectively is a duty—the duty even—of a revolutionary party
to ‘‘dissolve the people and elect another,’’ that is, to bring about the tran-
substantiation of the ‘‘old’’ opportunistic people (the inert ‘‘crowd’’) into a
518   Slavoj Žižek



revolutionary body aware of its historical task. Far from being an easy task,
to ‘‘dissolve the people and elect another’’ is the most diﬃcult of them all.
What this means is that one should gather the courage to question radically
today’s predominant attitude of antiauthoritarian tolerance. It was, surpris-
ingly, Bernard Williams who, in his perspicuous reading of David Mamet’s
Oleanna, outlined the limits of this attitude:
      A complaint constantly made by the female character is that she has
      made sacriﬁces to come to college, in order to learn something, to be
      told things that she did not know, but that she has been oﬀered only
      a feeble permissiveness. She complains that her teacher . . . does not
      control or direct her enough: he does not tell her what to believe, or
      even, perhaps, what to ask. He does not exercise authority. At the same
      time, she complains that he exercises power over her. This might seem
      to be a muddle on her part, or the playwright’s, but it is not. The male
      character has power over her (he can decide what grade she gets), but
      just because he lacks authority, this power is mere power, in part gen-
      der power.6
Power appears (is experienced) ‘‘as such’’ at the very point where it is no
longer covered by ‘‘authority.’’ There are, however, further complications to
Williams’s view. First, ‘‘authority’’ is not simply a direct property of the mas-
ter ﬁgure, but an eﬀect of the social relationship between the master and
his subjects: even if the master remains the same, it may happen, because
of the change in the sociosymbolic ﬁeld, that his position is no longer per-
ceived as legitimate authority, but as mere illegitimate power (is such a
shift not the most elementary gesture of feminism: male authority is all
of a sudden unmasked as mere power?). The lesson of all revolutions from
1789 to 1989 is that such a disintegration of authority, its transformation
into arbitrary power, always precedes the revolutionary outbreak. Where
Williams is right is in his emphasis on how the very permissiveness of the
power-ﬁgure, its restraining from exercising authority by directing, control-
ling, his subject, enables authority appears as illegitimate power. Therein
resides the vicious cycle of today’s academia: the more professors renounce
‘‘authoritarian’’ active teaching, imposing knowledge and values, the more
they are experienced as ﬁgures of power. And, as every parent knows, the
same goes for parental education: a father who exerts true transferential
authority will never be experienced as ‘‘oppressive’’—it is, on the contrary, a
father who tries to be permissive, who does not want to impose on his chil-
                                        From Politics to Biopolitics . . . and Back   519



dren his views and values, but allows them to discover their own way, that
is denounced as exerting power, as being ‘‘oppressive.’’
   The paradox to be fully endorsed here is that the only way to eﬀectively
abolish power relations leads through freely accepted relations of authority:
the model of a free collective is not a group of libertines indulging in their
pleasures, but the extremely disciplined revolutionary collective. The in-
junction that holds together such a collective is best encapsulated by the
logical form of double negation (prohibition), which, precisely, is not the
same as the direct positive assertion. Toward the end of Brecht’s Die Mass-
nahme, the Four Agitators declare:
     It is a terrible thing to kill.
     But not only others would we kill, but ourselves too if need be
     Since only force can alter this
     Murderous world, as
     Every living creature knows.
     It is still, we said
     Not given to us not to kill.7
The text does not say ‘‘we are allowed to kill,’’ but ‘‘it is still not permitted
(an adequate paraphrase of vergönnen) to us not to kill’’—or, simply, it is still
prohibited to us not to kill. Brecht’s precision is here admirable: the double
negation is crucial. ‘‘It is allowed to kill’’ would amount to simple immoral
permissivity; ‘‘it is ordered to kill’’ would transform killing into an obscene-
perverse superego injunction that is the truth of the ﬁrst version (as Lacan
put it, the permitted jouissance inexorably turned into a prescribed one). The
only correct way is thus the reversal of the biblical prohibition, the prohibi-
tion not to kill, which goes to the end, to the anti-Antigonean prohibition to
provide for the proper funeral ritual: the young comrade has to ‘‘vanish, and
vanish entirely’’—that is, his disappearance (death) itself should disappear,
should not leave any (symbolic) traces. This radical stance is the logical con-
clusion of the self-erasure of the revolutionary agent who is denied not only
public recognition, but even posthumous recognition after his death; in the
‘‘Praise of Illegal Activity,’’ the Control Chorus sings:
     Speaking, but
     Without betraying the speaker.
     Winning, but
     Without betraying the winner.
520 Slavoj Žižek



     Dying, but
     Without declaring the death.
     Who would not do a lot for fame? Who
     Would do as much for silence? 8
This is revolutionary activity performed from the stance of ‘‘subjective des-
titution’’: not ‘‘authentically displaying one’s position of enunciation,’’ but
erasing oneself behind the enunciated, in an act without subject. What the
immortal Martha Argerich said about her piano playing (‘‘I love piano play-
ing, I just hate to be a pianist’’) also goes for the revolutionary: he loves the
revolution, but hates to be a revolutionary.
   Bernard Williams can again be of some help here, when he elaborates
what forever separates must from ought: ‘‘Ought is related to must as best is
related to only.’’ 9 We arrive at what we must do after a long and anxious con-
sideration of alternatives, and ‘‘can have that belief while remaining uncer-
tain about it, and still very clearly seeing the powerful merits of alternative
courses.’’ 10 This diﬀerence between must and ought also relies on tempo-
rality: we can reproach somebody for not having done what he ‘‘ought to
have done,’’ while we cannot say to someone ‘‘You must have done it’’ if he
did not do it—we use the expression ‘‘You must have done it’’ to console
somebody who did a thing he found distasteful (like ‘‘Do not blame yourself,
even if you loved him, you must have punished him!’’), while the standard
use of the expression ‘‘You ought to have done it’’ implies, on the contrary,
that you did not do it.
   This reference to a ‘‘must’’ also opens up the space of manipulation, like
when a bargaining partner or outright blackmailer says that, ‘‘deplorably,’’
this leaves him with no alternative to taking an unpleasant action—and, we
may add, like the ruthless Stalinist who ‘‘cannot but’’ engage in terror. The
falsity of this position resides in the fact that, when we ‘‘must’’ do some-
thing, it is not only that, within the limits that our situation sets to delib-
eration, we ‘‘cannot do otherwise but this’’: the character of a person is not
only revealed in that he does what he must, but also ‘‘in the location of those
limits, and in the very fact that one can determine, sometimes through
deliberation itself, that one cannot do certain things, and must do others.’’ 11
And one is responsible for one’s character, for the choice of coordinates
that prevent me from doing some things and impel me to do others. This
brings us to the Lacanian notion of act: in an act, I precisely redeﬁne the
very coordinates of what I cannot and must do.
                                               From Politics to Biopolitics . . . and Back   521



   Must and ought thus relate as the Real and the Symbolic: the Real of a
drive whose injunction cannot be avoided (which is why Lacan says that
the status of a drive is ethical); the Ought as a symbolic ideal caught in the
dialectic of desire (if you ought not to do something, this very prohibition
generates the desire to do it). When you ‘‘must’’ do something, it means
you have no choice but to do it, even if is terrible: in Wagner’s Die Walkure,
Wotan is cornered by Fricka and he ‘‘must’’ (‘‘cannot but’’) allow the murder
of Siegmund, although his heart bleeds for him; he ‘‘must’’ (‘‘cannot but’’)
punish Brunhilde, his dearest child, the embodiment of his own innermost
striving. And, incidentally, the same goes for Wagner’s Tristan und Isolde,
the Bayreuth staging of which was Mueller’s last great theatrical achieve-
ment: they must, they cannot but, indulge in their passion, even if this goes
against their Sollen, their social obligations. In Wotan’s forced exercise of
punishment,Wagner encounters here the paradox of the ‘‘killing with pieta’’
at work from the Talmud (which calls us to dispense Justice with Love) to
Brecht’s two key Lehrstuecke, Der Jasager and Die Massnahme, in which the
young comrade is killed by his companions with loving tenderness. And
this is what today, in our time in which the abstract humanitarian rejection
of violence is accompanied by its obscene double, the anonymous killing
without pieta, we need more than ever.

Notes
  1 I owe this point to Ken Rinehard, UCLA.
  2 See Eric Santner, My Own Private Germany (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
    1996), 26.
  3 For a clear articulation of this stance, see Martin Jay, ‘‘No Power to the Soviets,’’ in his
    Cultural Semantics (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1998).
  4 William Taubman, Khrushchev: The Man and His Era (London: Free Press, 2003), 493.
  5 Bertolt Brecht, Gedichte in einem Band (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1982), 1009–10.
 6 Bernard Williams, Truth and Truthfulness (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2002),
    7–8.
  7 Bertolt Brecht, Collected Plays: Three (London: Methuen, 1997), 87.
  8 Brecht, Collected Plays, 68.
 9 Williams, Truth and Truthfulness, 125.
10 Ibid., 126.
 11 Ibid., 130.
