20
ART
∨ ∨
    AS SYMPTOM
ZIZEK AND THE ETHICS OF
PSYCHOANALYTIC CRITICISM

TIM DEAN

                                                                                          ∨ ∨
This paper tackles a problem that is exemplified by, but not restricted to, Slavoj Zizek’s
work: the tendency to treat aesthetic artifacts as symptoms of the culture in which they
were produced. Whether or not one employs the vocabulary and methods of
psychoanalysis to do so, this approach to aesthetics has become so widespread in the
humanities that it qualifies as a contemporary critical norm. As a norm, it may be subject
to debate and even contestation. Today it is normative to read literature, film, and other
cultural texts primarily as evidence about the societies that made them—evidence that
necessarily requires our hermeneutic labor in order to yield its significance. This
methodological protocol remains in place whether one inhabits critical perspectives as
ostensibly disparate as historicist, materialist, or psychoanalytic modes of thinking; it is
also a grounding assumption of cultural studies, irrespective of how one defines that
critical practice. Indeed, the issue I want to address is quite as much
                                                                      ∨ ∨
                                                                           a Marxist problem
as it is a psychoanalytic one, and therefore the way in which Zizek articulates Lacan
with
 ∨ ∨
      Marx makes his work especially fertile terrain on which to engage this matter. As
Zizek reminds us in The Sublime Object of Ideology,
                                                ∨ ∨
                                                         Lacan claimed that Marx invented
the symptom [SO 11]—an observation that Zizek has been keen to exploit from the very
beginning
      ∨ ∨
             of his work.
      Zizek’s combining psychoanalysis with Marxism in novel ways has helped make
Lacan more palatable to contemporary critical sensibilities by politicizing psychoanalysis,
demonstrating
    ∨ ∨
                 how it offers less an account of the individual than of society and culture.
In Zizek’s hands psychoanalytic theory appears less vulnerable to the      standard criticisms
                                                                         ∨ ∨
that it is ahistorical and apolitical. While a number of critiques of Zizek have reiterated
these common objections, nevertheless his politicizing of psychoanalysis has been
particularly important during a period that witnessed the rise of new historicism, the
institutionalization of cultural studies, and the escalating importance of   ∨ ∨
                                                                                “the political”
as a sign—perhaps the sign—of humanities professors’ seriousness.1 Zizek’s work has
gone a long way toward making Lacan seem indispensable to cultural studies, just as
Juliet Mitchell’s and Jacqueline Rose’s work a decade earlier made Lacan seem
indispensable to theoretically rigorous feminism. At a moment when the poststructuralist  ∨ ∨
variant of Lacanian theory was being displaced by historicist modes of thought, Zizek
emerged on the scene to revivify psychoanalysis and make    ∨ ∨
                                                                  it exciting again. Thus his
work’s appeal has an historical basis quite apart from Zizek’s own personal charisma
and his remarkable productivity. It is his politicizing of psychoanalysis, as much as his

Thanks to Julia Bader and George Starr, in whose house    ∨ ∨
                                                              this essay was composed.
     1. For significant considerations of the politics of Zizek’s work, see Bellamy; Chow; Guerra;
Miklitsch; Resch,
              ∨ ∨
                   “Running”; Resch, “Sound.” Whereas these studies focus on the political im-
plications of Zizekian thinking, the present study concerns the different (though related) question
of the ethical ramifications of his work.



diacritics / summer 2002                                   diacritics 32.2: 21–41               21
                                                      ∨ ∨
rendering Lacan newly accessible, that has made Zizek popular. I want to argue, however,
that his style of politicizing psychoanalysis
                                     ∨ ∨
                                               carries a significant ethical cost, one that
follows partly as a consequence of Zizek’s failure to work through his theoretical relation
to Althusser, from whom he derives the practice of symptomatic reading while claiming
to displace the latter’s version of psychoanalytic Marxism. Thus I shall be arguing for a
significant distinction between a political and an ethical psychoanalysis, suggesting
that we have been cultivating the former at the expense of the latter.


Spaghetti Psychoanalysis
                                                ∨ ∨
The notion of the symptom is central to Zizek’s thinking about politics and culture.
Although in his work and in psychoanalytic theory more generally the term symptom
carries
   ∨ ∨
        a range of conceptual meanings, symptomatology remains the governing trope
of Zizek’s oeuvre. Following
                         ∨ ∨
                             Lacan, who continued to modify the concept of the symptom
throughout his career, Zizek argues that just about anything can be understood as
symptomatic:

     [I]n the final years of Lacan’s teaching we find a kind of universalization of
     the symptom: almost everything that is becomes in a way symptom, so that
     finally even woman is determined as the symptom of man. We can even say
     that “symptom” is Lacan’s final answer to the eternal philosophical question
     “Why is there something instead of nothing?”—this “something” which “is”
     instead of nothing is indeed the symptom. [SO 71–72]

If, for reasons to be elaborated, virtually∨ ∨
                                              anything can be considered a symptom, then
this conceptual move illuminates how Zizek can write about everything, how he seems
able to render all cultural phenomena as grist to his theoretical mill. Having grasped the
structural logic of the symptom, ∨ ∨
                                     one may submit practically anything of interest to its
explanatory grid. And while Zizek expounds more than merely one logic of symptom
formation, his structural logics—like his many books—tend to remain variations on a
single theme.
      If, according to Lacan at the end of his career, the symptom has become a condition
of subjective existence rather than a contingent problem, then there can be no possibility
of curing symptoms in the manner that Freud envisioned when he invented
psychoanalysis. Yet while this universalizing of symptomatology sidelines the question
of cure, it does nothing to diminish the psychoanalytic zeal for diagnosis and
interpretation. Instead, the opposite is true: universalizing the symptom fuels the motive
for diagnosis and interpretation, since symptoms are no longer localized and self-evident
but lurking everywhere. A hermeneutic operation becomes necessary before we can see
how, for example, woman is the symptom of∨ man.2 By shifting symptoms from the
                                                    ∨
category of the exception to that of the rule, Zizek to some extent depathologizes the
symptom, converting it into a subjective norm. But to the degree that his method requires
a diagnostic stance (insofar
                          ∨ ∨
                              as it encourages an intensified hermeneutic vigilance vis-à-
vis the cultural field), Zizek’s symptomatology raises questions about the ethics of
diagnosis. While Lacan’s universalizing of the symptom provokes fundamental
        ∨ ∨
     2. Ziz ek elaborates this particular example in Enjoy Your Symptom! [31–67]. The charac-
terization of woman as the symptom of man may be understood as a heterosexist correlate of the
Lacanian axiom that there is no sexual relation (“il n’y a pas de rapport sexuel”). Although space
prevents me from taking up this example of the symptom, I have pursued some of the issues it
raises for sexual politics in Dean, “Homosexuality.”



22
epistemological questions too, my primary concern lies with the ethical implications of
a critical approach that regards the universe as perpetually in need of interpretation.
Reading one’s world in terms of symptoms positions one as a hermeneut with a particular  ∨ ∨
relation to the world—a relation of suspicion and putative mastery. Although Zizek
repeatedly points out that one can never master one’s “own” symptom (but only enjoy
it), his method nonetheless situates the critic in a position of hermeneutic mastery over
the social and cultural symptoms he or she diagnoses. One cannot help    ∨ ∨
                                                                              noticing that in
his dozen or so books no cultural artifact poses any resistance to Zizek’s hermeneutic
energy; there is no social system or movie or opera or novel that he cannot interpret. We
might
 ∨ ∨
        say that there seems to be no cultural phenomenon that, with his Lacanian schema,
Zizek∨ cannot master.3
         ∨
      Zizek’s hermeneutic voracity—what Tom Cohen characterizes as his approaching
“the vast samples of American popular culture with vampirelike urgency” [356]—could
be understood as but one more instance of psychoanalysis’s imperialism, its tendency to
find exemplifications of its principles everywhere it turns [see Derrida; Meltzer]. I would
suggest, however, that viewing cultural phenomena through the lens of symptomatology
points to a larger problem, one that pertains to not only psychoanalytic criticism but
also Marxism, historicism, and cultural studies. The problem lies in the way that treating
aesthetic artifacts as cultural symptoms ∨elides the specificity of art, making cultural
                                                 ∨
forms too readily apprehensible as what Zizek, in one definition of the symptom, calls
“the point of emergence of the truth about social relations” [SO 26]. Of course, the
category
 ∨ ∨
           of art—and, more broadly, that of aesthetic experience—does not appear in
Zizek’s work; speaking of “art” when discussing post-Lacanian ideology critique may
appear as quaintly anachronistic. But that is exactly my     ∨ ∨
                                                                point. Despite his interest in
Kantian philosophy and his evocation of the sublime, Zizek’s approach to culture and
society leaves little conceptual space for any consideration of aesthetic effects or their
significance.4
      This is an ethical problem because it eradicates dimensions of alterity particular to
art, making any encounter with the difficulty and strangeness of aesthetic experience
seem beside the point. Rather than finding any moments of∨opacity or resistance to his
                                                                   ∨
hermeneutic schemes when engaging aesthetic artifacts, Zizek finds only a familiar
scenario—one that his readers now recognize quickly too. Although he speaks almost
continuously about otherness, no actual  ∨ ∨
                                             instances of otherness are permitted to interrupt
his interpretive discourse. And while Zizek’s approach exemplifies this problem especially
strikingly, it is far from limited to his work. Business as usual throughout the humanities
proceeds as if thinking about art symptomatically—as a “point of emergence of the
truth about social relations”—were the only credible alternative to thinking about art as

                          ∨ ∨
      3. See, for example, Ziz ek’s analysis of September 11, which began circulating
                                                                                ∨ ∨
                                                                                       online merely
weeks after the event [Welcome]. As Louis Menand points out apropos of Ziz ek and others, the
intellectual certainty manifested on the Left in the wake of 9/11 is itself rather troubling:

     The initial response of most cultural and political critics to the attacks of September
     11th—a completely unanticipated atrocity carried out by an organization that few people
     in the West had ever heard of and whose intentions are still not entirely comprehen-
     sible—was: It just proves what I’ve always said. . . . The surprising thing about most of
     the published reflections on September 11th is how devoid of surprise they are. They
     are so devoid of surprise as to be almost devoid of thought. [98]
                                                       ∨ ∨
      4. Rey Chow notes, in passing, this feature of Ziz ek’s work: “Whether
                                                                          ∨ ∨
                                                                                 he is reading litera-
ture, film, jokes, comics, science fiction, philosophy, or anything else, Ziz ek is seldom interested
in the problem of aesthetic form and its relation to (the construction of) subjectivity as such” [7].




diacritics / summer 2002                                                                           23
the creation of transcendent genius. I find both of these alternatives unsatisfactory because
both effectively make art transparent, reducing its alterity to more   ∨ ∨
                                                                           familiar terms. In
what follows, I elucidate the epistemological implications of Zizek’s notion of the
sociocultural symptom, before pursuing its ethical implications and suggesting how
psychoanalysis might provide some conceptual resources for a more ethically defensible
approach to aesthetics.


Arguing for the Real
                            ∨ ∨
Thus far my critique of Zizek has argued that his combining Hegelian Marxism with
Lacanian psychoanalysis conduces to a critical perspective on cultural matters that makes
aesthetic forms overly familiar, rendering them instantly recognizable as the products
of ideological conflict. Were it not∨that symptomatic reading constitutes the approach I
                                        ∨
wish to critique, I would say that Zizek’s work itself stands ∨as the symptom of a much
                                                                  ∨
larger critical problem. In other words, I have suggested that Zizek makes art too familiar
and that this critical tendency itself can be seen as dispiritingly familiar. But it must be
acknowledged that the appearance, in 1989, of The Sublime Object of Ideology
inaugurated an innovative approach in the history of psychoanalytic criticism. It was
not something familiar∨ ∨
                          but a wonderfully strange new critical voice that we heard when
we began reading Zizek. He revivified psychoanalytic criticism by making it more
political, more philosophical, and ultimately more popular; and he achieved all this by
shifting the emphasis from analyses of imaginary and symbolic representations to an
engagement with that which resists representation: the real.
 ∨ ∨
      Following Jacques-Alain Miller’s systematic periodization of Lacanian thought,
Zizek focuses his sharpest attention on the “late Lacan,” wherein the concept of the
real—along with the notions of drive, jouissance, Thing, and objet petit a associated
with it—comes to the fore. Lacan’s insistence throughout the 1950s on the subjective
importance of the signifier gave way (circa 1960) to a growing interest in what the
signifier could not accommodate and, indeed, what animates the symbolic universe in
the first place.5 With the waning of structuralism and its emphasis on the quasideterminist
role of symbolic structures in human life, Lacan began expending greater speculative
energy on the underdetermination of subjectivity by symbolic forms. Whereas the concept
of overdetermination derived from psychoanalytic hermeneutics (specifically, The
Interpretation of Dreams) had promised a theory of subject formation that seemed
compatible with Lévi-Strauss’s structuralism, in fact the multiply determining relations
created by chains of signifiers connected in a symbolic network could never completely
determine the subjective effects they were invoked to explain. There is always something
left over, something unexplained by symbolic determination. Hence Freud’s observations
about the enigmatic “navel of the dream”; hence, too, Lacan’s attempts to theorize this
subjective underdetermination via a range of terms and concepts (principally that of
l’objet petit a).
      Paradoxically the Freudian understanding of overdetermination leads to a radically
nondeterminist theory of subjectivity; Lacan’s account of the symbolic order’s constitutive
effects does not revoke all notions of subjective agency, as often has been assumed in
Anglo-American debates about the ideological consequences of Lacanian psychoanalysis.

        ∨ ∨
 ∨ ∨
      5. Ziz ek locates this shift in Lacan’s seminar on The Ethics of Psychoanalysis, 1959–60
[Ziz ek, “Undergrowth” 7]. The publication of this seminar in 1986 and ∨ ∨
                                                                           its translation into En-
glish in 1992 provide dates that circumscribe the period during which Ziz ek was in the process of
emerging as the intellectual figure that we know today.




24
To discredit the notion of individual autonomy is not to nullify agency tout court. Much
of the confusion on this score stems from a reluctance to engage the theoretical debates
of psychoanalytic Marxism, particularly Althusser’s account of the overdetermination
of social contradictions and the consequent relative autonomy of various social practices,
including the aesthetic [Althusser, “Contradiction”]. The Althusserian concept of “relative
autonomy” is one to which I shall return; for now I want to register simply that it is the
implications
 ∨ ∨
                of symbolic underdetermination for an account of political agency that
Zizek has been intent on developing throughout his work.
     He has tried to accomplish this by explaining the Lacanian real—that which resists
representation—in terms of a notion of antagonism drawn from Ernesto Laclau and
Chantal Mouffe’s post-Marxian theory of radical democracy. In Hegemony and Socialist
Strategy (1985), Laclau and Mouffe employ the term antagonism to describe an
ideological field’s discursive failure to fully constitute itself. Rather than being considered
incidental, such failure actually structures the ideological field, while also providing
opportunities for political struggle and,∨ in principle, the possibility of social change.
                                              ∨
Inspired by this constellation of ideas, Zizek proceeded to rewrite Laclau and Mouffe’s
notion of discursive failure in terms of the Lacanian real, arguing that any symbolic
universe is structured by that∨ which it cannot accommodate and therefore necessarily
                                    ∨
excludes. We might say that Zizek pumps up the concept of the real, developing it from
a relatively passive notion of inherent limit to something like the raison d’être of all
discursive activity—ideological, cultural, and otherwise. He does this by redefining the
connection between the symbolic and the real: more than as a relation of heterogeneity,
in which∨the symbolic cannot apprehend and therefore by definition does not include
            ∨
the real, Zizek pictures the symbolic’s exclusion of the real as constitutive, as its founding
instance and that which ∨ ∨
                            fuels symbolic machinery even as it threatens to disrupt it. It is
this relation that Zizek describes using the term “antagonism” (or “deadlock” or
“impossibility,” as he also often characterizes it). Thus whereas Laclau and Mouffe
conceptualize antagonism
                    ∨ ∨
                              somewhat deconstructively in terms of discursive failure or
contradiction, Ziz ek conceptualizes antagonism more insistently in terms of the
unsymbolizable real, thereby shifting the accent in a way that has generated considerable
debate among  ∨ ∨
                  these thinkers.6
     When Zizek characterizes the ideological field as constituted around a deadlock
that by definition does not admit of discursive or practical manipulation, the possibilities
for political struggle and melioration
                                ∨ ∨
                                           start to seem bleak. Skepticism concerning the
political implications of Ziz ek’s psychoanalytic account of ideology has led to
disagreement over the status of the Lacanian real as constitutively excluded from symbolic
formations. For example, Judith Butler has argued that what is constitutively excluded
from the sociosymbolic order should be subject to political rearticulation, and therefore
that to hypostasize the real as definitively unsymbolizable is effectively to secure a
social system that excludes various minorities (including queers) by shunting their lives

                                                            ∨ ∨
      6. In his afterword to Laclau’s New Reflections, Ziz ek is explicit about this distinction,
insisting that “[w]e must then distinguish the experience of antagonism in its radical form, as a
limit of the social, as the impossibility around which the social field is structured, from antago-
nism as the relation between antagonistic subject-positions: in Lacanian terms,
                                                                              ∨ ∨
                                                                                     we must distin-
guish antagonism as real from the social reality of the antagonistic
                                                             ∨ ∨
                                                                     fight” [Ziz ek, “Beyond” 253;
original emphases]. The question of the relation between Ziz ek’s use ∨of the notion of antagonism
                                                                          ∨
and Laclau’s is one of the topics addressed in Butler, Laclau, and Ziz ek’s Contingency, Hege-
mony, Universality.
                  ∨ ∨
                      See  also Laclau [“Theory,” esp.  15], where he  makes   clear the limits of his
agreement with Ziz ek’s construing antagonism in terms of the real. In his most recent thinking,
Laclau wishes to align the real with his concept of dislocation and to retain an understanding of
antagonism as discursive, not real.



diacritics / summer 2002                                                                           25
into zones of the unthinkable and unlivable.7 The problem in this debate is—and always
has been—the ideological
                       ∨ ∨
                                implications of the real; thus the aspect of Lacanian
psychoanalysis that Zizek has brought to the fore, theorizing it in book after book, is
still the source of greatest misunderstanding.8
      Having intervened ∨in this debate on more than one occasion, I now see better than
                            ∨
I did previously how Zizek’s success in explaining the concept of the real is also
paradoxically what has enabled misunderstandings to occur and, indeed, continues to
reinforce rather than diminish them. Because Lacan’s real can be defined ∨only negatively
                                                                            ∨
(as “impossible” and suchlike), it is an infuriatingly abstract concept. Zizek has made
the concept more accessible by illustrating it with innumerable examples, many of them
drawn from the familiar world of popular culture. Thus although he maintains (correctly,
in my view) that the real is inherently nonsubstantial and has no necessary positive
content, he repeatedly argues this philosophical point through examples   ∨ ∨
                                                                             that lend the
real any number of quite memorable positive contents. The appeal of Zizek’s work—
but also one of its greatest rhetorical drawbacks—lies in his substituting, by way of
explanation, very concrete instances for highly abstract ideas. Thus we should not find
it quite so puzzling that Butler seems unable to grasp this elementary concept and keeps
insisting that the constitutive exclusions through which the sociosymbolic founds itself
must be understood in terms of racial and sexual ∨ ∨
                                                     discrimination. She attributes to the
real one kind of positive content because Ziz ek keeps explaining it by way of
exemplifications that lend it other kinds of positive content.9


Enjoying the Idea of the Symptom
                                                                    ∨ ∨
Another way of stating this problem would be to say that Zizek’s argument about the
real as nonmeaning (or resistance to meaning) tends to be accompanied by a frenzy of
meaning-making activity—a
                      ∨ ∨
                              dazzling hermeneutic spectacle—on his part. Resistance
to meaning is one of Zizek’s perennial themes, but it is never allowed to interfere with
his own discursive performance. Thus although he claims that “late Lacan” takes us
beyond hermeneutics (by taking us beyond the world ∨of interpretable signifiers to that
                                                          ∨
of the uninterpretable because unsymbolizable real), Zizek seems most in his element
when he is busily interpreting the products of mass culture and gaily revealing their
hidden significance. This disjunction
                              ∨ ∨
                                      between what he says and what he does suggests
more than a contradiction in Zizek’s idiosyncratic critical practice: it indexes the limits
of symptomatic reading as an approach to culture. The hermeneutic quest for meaning
assumes that true significance remains concealed until it is revealed by an interpretive
act; and the notion of symptom embodies this assumption. There can be no symptom
without an interpretant. To diagnose something as a symptom is to posit a hidden

                                     ∨ ∨
      7. Butler first took issue with Ziz ek’s account of ideology formation in “Arguing with the
Real,”
 ∨ ∨
         and developed her argument in The Psychic Life of Power. I discuss Butler’s critique of
Ziz ek and her misunderstanding of the real in “Bodies That Mutter.”
      8. ∨In his final contribution to the exchanges collected in Contingency, Hegemony, Univer-
           ∨
sality, Ziz ek notes this problem: “Perhaps the ultimate object of contention in our debate is the
status of the (Lacanian) real” [308].
      9. This also sheds some light on Butler’s sophistic contention that “[t]o claim that the real
resists symbolization is still to symbolize the real as a kind of resistance” [“Arguing” 207]. As I
demonstrate in Beyond Sexuality [182–83], Butler is quite mistaken    ∨ ∨
                                                                            here; yet in making her
erroneous argument she is picking up on a significant problem in Ziz ek’s work and throwing into
relief just how difficult it is to discuss the real without in some way familiarizing and thereby
betraying it.




26
significance that must be elicited via interpretation. Hence Lacan’s early definition of
the symptom as “structured like a language”—that is, as meaningful without being fully
transparent [Lacan, “Function” 59].
      By bringing out the semiotic aspect of the symptom—“the symptom being a
metaphor in which flesh or function is taken as a signifying element”—Lacan lays the
groundwork for vastly expanding the traditional psychoanalytic conception of what
qualifies as a symptom [Lacan, “Agency” 166]. If a symptom can be understood as a
metaphor in which part of the body or a somatic function takes the place of a signifier,
then interpretation consists in determining what signifier or message has been replaced
by that portion of the anatomy and why. The symptom’s true message lies hidden behind
its corporeal surrogate. In this account we observe the steps of an argument about the
relation between language and organic phenomena that founds psychoanalysis, namely,
that a physiological ailment (for instance, Dora’s cough) may be considered a message;
that the message is concealed because a substitution has occurred; and that therefore the
message requires decoding via interpretation. Behind this psychoanalytic logic lies the
metaphysical assumption that truth is hidden, and it is this assumption that undergirds
the hermeneutic enterprise. The correlative assumption is that whatever is hidden must
be true, that the subject’s truth resides in what he or she conceals. Hence Lacan’s remark
that “[t]he symptom is in itself, through and through, signification, that is to say, truth,
truth taking shape” [Seminar 2 320].
      This account represents the early period of Lacan’s theory of symptom formation,
but we can see how his defining it semiotically already initiates a process of universalizing
the symptom. Structured like a language, the symptom is first and foremost a sign of the
unconscious; its primary message is general, not specific: the unconscious is here, and
it has something to say. By aligning the symptom with the unconscious (both of which
are defined as “structured like a language”) and by identifying the truth of the symptom
as concealed thanks to a metaphoric subsitution, Lacan aligns subjective truth with the
unconscious and implies, moreover, that this truth is hidden. Hence the necessity for
interpretation to bring it out. But if the unconscious is hidden, this is not because it lies
concealed inside the individual, in the depths of her mind or the recesses of his soul.
Rather, the unconscious is hidden in plain view, like the purloined letter in Poe’s story
[Lacan, “Seminar”].10 Lacan considers the unconscious to be a property of surfaces, not
of depths; hence his distinguishing psychoanalysis from depth psychology and his interest
in topology, particularly the mathematical transformation of surfaces. Exterior to the
self, the unconscious is that “other scene” that emerges as an effect of symbolic life and
differentially affects us all. Once it too is conceived in terms of language, the symptom
can be understood to afflict not only hysterics but everybody. Thus Lacan’s redefinition
of the symptom as sînthome late in his career, though it has been taken to mark a radical
shift in his thinking, was always a latent possibility insofar as his description of symptoms
as “structured like a language” and characterized by metaphoric substitution universalized
the symptom from the start.
      One significant difference between early and late Lacanian conceptions of the
symptom is that the sînthome is said to block rather∨ ∨
                                                         than to elicit interpretation—though
the idea of the sînthome doesn’t seem to inhibit Zizek’s hermeneutic energy. In principle,
however, the sînthome stymies interpretation because “late Lacan” shifts symptoms
from the symbolic register to the real, ∨ ∨
                                           recognizing in the symptom that which binds the
subject to his or her jouissance. As Zizek glosses this shift: “The symptom is not only a

     10. A recent instance of the idea that the unconscious involves hiding something in plain
sight is offered by the British psychoanalyst Adam Phillips, who describes a five-year-old girl
who initiates every session by walking into his consulting room, closing her eyes, and urging
Phillips to find her [Phillips 3–9].



diacritics / summer 2002                                                                     27
cyphered message, it is at the same time a way for the subject to organize his enjoyment—
that is why, even after the completed interpretation, the subject is not prepared to renounce
his symptom; that is why he ‘loves his symptom more than himself’” [SO 74]. In this
view, our symptoms are what keep us going, and therefore they cannot be removed
without the risk of subjective dissolution. Symptoms provide a certain kind of satisfaction,
as well as a measure of discomfort and pain. Here the symptom is no longer the result of
a metaphorical substitution but rather functions as a sign of the unsubstitutable real.
Lacan’s shift ∨ ∨
                  from thinking of symptoms in primarily symbolic to primarily real terms
appeals to Zizek, who summarizes his understanding of it thus: “This, then, is a symptom:
a particular, ‘pathological,’ signifying formation, a binding of enjoyment, an inert stain
resisting communication and interpretation, a stain which cannot be included in the
circuit of discourse, of social bond network, but is at the same time a positive condition
of it”∨ [SO 75]. Here we have encapsulated the structural logic of symptom formation
         ∨
that Zizek employs throughout his work.                               ∨ ∨
      It is remarkable that in this synopsis of the symptom’s logic Zizek makes no mention
of the unconscious. Whereas for Freud and Lacan the symptom functions first and
foremost as a sign  ∨ ∨
                        of the unconscious—whether of an unconscious wish or an unconscious
message—for Zizek the symptom functions as a sign of the real, “an inert stain resisting
communication and interpretation.” For Freud the symptom represents a compromise
formation, a product∨ ∨
                             of the conflict between unconscious wishes and the forces of
repression; for Zizek, however,
                            ∨ ∨
                                     the symptom is a product of antagonism between language
and the real. Thus Zizek converts the central Freudian idea of compromise (der
Kompromiß) into a modified notion of Laclauean antagonism. He nevertheless remains
in accord with classical psychoanalytic theory when it comes to the dimension            ∨ ∨
                                                                                             of
satisfaction that consolidates the symptom and makes it so hard to dislodge. What Zizek
describes as “a binding of enjoyment” (or jouissance), Freud locates in the symptom as
a “substitute-formation,” whereby the satisfaction found in the symptom has replaced
the instinctual process that has been affected by defense [Freud, Inhibitions 145]. In
Freudian terms, this substitution can be understood economically as a process in which
the symptom provides an unconscious wish with a surrogate satisfaction; and it can be
understood symbolically as the process through which one unconscious idea is replaced
by another according to certain chains of association [Laplanche and Pontalis 434].
Thus both “early” and “late” Lacanian accounts of the symptom—the symptom as a
metaphorical substitution (a “ciphered message”) and the sînthome as a condensation of
jouissance—can be regarded as latent in Freud.
      Thanks to its theory of the unconscious, psychoanalysis tacitly universalizes
symptomatology from its inception. Epistemologically this universalization
problematizes the symptom’s medical status, while at the same time facilitating
symptomatology’s transposition from the clinical to the cultural realm. Indeed, originally
the symptom was just as much a cultural idea as a medical one, according to Marjorie
Garber in Symptoms of Culture, so we should not trouble ourselves unduly about its
epistemological status from a clinical point of view.11 All it takes to extend the logic of

      11. See Garber: “It might be supposed that the word symptom itself began as a medical term
and became more broadly and metaphorically applied, over time, to other realms of inquiry, but
in fact this is not the case. Symptoms were from the beginning broadly defined cultural indica-
tors; it is symptomatic of our own desire to classify, categorize, and limit, that we should think of
them in a more restricted pathological sense” [3]. While Garber’s approach to culture, in this
and other books, exemplifies the kind of critical
                                            ∨ ∨
                                                   method that is the target of∨ my critique, I would
                                                                                 ∨
like to distinguish her perspective from Ziz ek’s. Although she alludes to Ziz ek in Symptoms of
Culture, Garber is interested more in symbolic networks and their metonymic displacements than
in the real. She claims as her inspiration the hermeneutical model laid out in The Interpretation of




28
symptom formation to culture and society is to conceive of the social as a space of
conflict, since symptoms are the result—and hence a sign—of conflict. As soon as one
dispenses with a functionalist sociological perspective and instead views the social in
terms of power relations, it immediately becomes clear that society is conflictual. Thus
the link to Marx is easily made, and any lingering uncertainty about why Lacan credited
him with inventing the symptom rapidly dissipates. Since from a psychoanalytic
perspective the unconscious stands as a sign of subjective conflict, Lacan’s reconceiving
the unconscious in terms of language—that is, as a social rather than an individual
dimension of experience—also situates symptoms beyond the         ∨ ∨
                                                                     merely personal realm.
Hence it seems little more than critical common sense when Zizek begins his inaugural
work by announcing that culture in its entirety should be considered a compromise
formation, the symptomatic outcome of a conflict: “All ‘culture’ is in a way a reaction-
formation, an attempt to limit, canalize—to cultivate this imbalance, this traumatic kernel,
this radical antagonism through which man cuts his umbilical cord with nature, with
animal homeostasis” [SO 5].12
     Once culture is conceived of in this manner, there can be but one politically
progressive approach to it, namely, demystification. The conflict that has given rise to
culture in general—and the more local conflicts that produce as their symptoms various
cultural phenomena—must be interpreted so that their ideological stakes become
apparent. In this way cultural criticism has come to be considered a form of political
work. Indeed, demystification has become the quintessential critical gesture when
responding to cultural artifacts; it tends to be regarded as the only responsible alternative
to either uncritical veneration (of art) or mindless consumption (of mass cultural
entertainment). The politically progressive critic is always about the business of
unmasking, attempting to unveil the ideological struggles behind a seemingly innocent
or harmonious work of art. Whereas traditional psychoanalytic criticism decoded the
neurotic conflicts of individual artists (finding in writers’ and painters’ characters the
surrogates of warring parts of their selves), contemporary psychoanalytic criticism
demystifies the transindividual struggles (whether social or ideological) that the work
of art is understood to encode.                                            ∨ ∨
     Of course, psychoanalytic Marxism in literary studies precedes Zizek and may be
traced at least to Althusser, who in Reading Capital coined the term “symptomatic
reading” to argue not only that he was approaching Marx’s text symptomatically, but
also that he was deriving his method from Marx’s own technique of reading the political

Dreams, arguing that cultural symptoms may be read according to this method by tracing their
associations in much the way that Freud does when interpreting dreams. Garber thus draws an
analogy between Freudian dreamwork—the psychical translation process that involves conden-
sation and displacement—and cultural work, suggesting that reading cultural artifacts in an
associative manner may be preferable to the primarily quantitative, empirical approach that
dominates sociology and certain versions of cultural studies. Her neopsychoanalytic method en-
ables greater
        ∨ ∨
               attention to particularity and specificity, including the specificities of literary works;
unlike Ziz ek, Garber is inclined to bracket questions about the representativeness or exemplarity
of the cultural artifacts∨ she considers. Perhaps as a result, Garber shows herself to be a subtler
                            ∨
reader of culture than Ziz ek, even as she is a weaker theorist.
     12. Technically we should distinguish between a compromise formation (of which symptoms
are an instance) and a reaction formation, since the reaction formation defends against a wish
while the compromise formation includes the substitutive satisfaction of a wish. But, as Laplanche
and Pontalis argue, in practice this distinction is hard to sustain, because the unconscious wish is
often discernible
            ∨ ∨
                   in the reaction formation, as well as in the compromise formation [378]. With
respect to Ziz ek’s characterization of culture as a reaction formation in the context of an argu-
ment that universalizes the symptom, I doubt that he is placing any weight on this particular
technical distinction.



diacritics / summer 2002                                                                              29
economy of David Ricardo and Adam Smith. Althusser characterizes Marx’s strategy as
“a reading which might well be called ‘symptomatic’ (symptomale), insofar as it divulges
the undivulged event in the text it reads, and in the same movement relates it to a different
text, present as a necessary absence in the first” [Althusser and Balibar 28; original
emphases]. In this regard, Althusser
                                   ∨ ∨
                                         already was claiming in 1965 that Marx invented
the symptom—a point that Ziz ek overlooks in order to promote his version of
psychoanalytic Marxism as definitively superseding Althusserianism. Yet while            ∨ ∨
appropriating from Althusser the notion and practice of symptomatic reading, Zizek
does not adopt with it the crucial concept of “relative autonomy,” at least as far as
aesthetic practice is concerned.
                            ∨ ∨
                                    Although he argues for “the autonomy of the psychic
domain” [Metastases 7], Zizek does not seem prepared to concede even relative autonomy
to the aesthetic domain, either in principle or in practice. The result is that he borrows
from Althusser what from my perspective represents one of the most problematic aspects
of his theory. The concept of relative autonomy may offer a partial solution to the problem
I’ve been delineating, insofar as it adumbrates how aesthetic forms are never only an
expression of ideological or cultural conflicts; and therefore it suggests that art cannot
be fully determined by—or reducible to—its contextual   ∨ ∨
                                                             matrix.13
     However, the problem I’m sketching exceeds Zizek’s hastiness vis-à-vis Althusser
or the absence in his theory of a viable conceptual space for specifically aesthetic effects.
Ongoing reactions to New Critical formalism in literary studies have generated profound
skepticism regarding any notion of autonomy when it comes to aesthetic practice—to
the extent that claims on behalf of “relative autonomy” provoke allergic responses from
left-leaning humanities professors, who seem to regard Althusser’s concept as a
dangerously anti-Marxian idea. In order to retrieve what Althusser meant by relative
autonomy, I want to develop his commitment to discursive specificity in terms of aesthetic
alterity, or what I call the otherness of art. By showing how discursive specificity entails
considering that dimension of irreducibility or alterity particular to distinct cultural
domains, I wish to emphasize the degree to which ethical as well as epistemological
issues are involved in these debates over critical approaches to aesthetics. While I concede
that treating works of art (or, more broadly, textual artifacts) in less individualistic ways
represents a measure of critical progress, I remain troubled by the unquestioned
assumption that any cultural text should be understood as a compromise formation, the
symptomatic product of a conflict whose terms are at least partly unconscious. Whether
one approaches textual forms in the context of an authorial or a cultural unconscious,
the conviction still holds that the work of art is duplicitous or ignorant of something,
that it exhibits contradictions of which it is unaware and therefore needs the critic to
help reveal. Neither artists nor their cultures are considered masters of the conflicts that
produce their work; instead the role of mastery—of interpreting the symptom—falls to
the demystifying critic.14 Hence my suggestion that there is something ethically suspect



      13. Althusser makes clear what he means by relative autonomy when he argues that “[t]he
fact that each of these times and each of these histories [including the history of aesthetic forms]
is relatively autonomous does not make them so many domains which are independent of the
whole: the specificity of each of these times and each of these histories—in other words, their
relative autonomy and independence—is based on a certain type of articulation in the whole, and
therefore on a certain type of dependence  ∨ ∨
                                               with respect to the whole” [Reading Capital 100;
original emphases]. A useful critique of Ziz ek’s relation to Althusser may be found in Bellamy.
For his relation to Lacan, see Althusser, Writings. A very enlightening critique of Althusser’s
appropriation of Lacan for his theory of interpellation is given in Barrett.
      14. A notable exception to this way of thinking may be found in a brief but suggestive essay
by Colette Soler, a Lacanian psychoanalyst who argues the following:



30
about this ostensibly progressive approach to cultural forms—in other words, that there
is a significant disjunction between the politics and the ethics of cultural study.


Suspecting Hermeneutics
                                                                                             ∨ ∨
The position that my critique has targeted thus far—and which I have taken Zizek’s
work to exemplify—goes under the general rubric of the hermeneutics of suspicion, a
phrase originally coined by existential phenomenologist Paul Ricoeur to describe the
interpretive protocols of Nietzsche, Marx, and Freud, but these days more often employed
by cultural conservatives such as Harold Bloom to inveigh against politicized literary
criticism.15 Interpretation is subject to greater contestation in modernity, according to
Ricoeur, because no universal canon remains to govern exegesis. In the wake of “the
death of God,” the position that authorized hermeneutics has dissolved. Where once a
scriptural or textual double meaning had been understood as the form through which
divinity manifested itself, now double meaning tends to be apprehended in terms of
dissimulation, and hence interpretation becomes coeval with demystification.
“Fundamentally,” Ricoeur argues, “the Genealogy of Morals in Nietzsche’s sense, the
theory of ideologies in the Marxist sense, and the theory of ideals and illusions in Freud’s
sense represent three convergent procedures of demystification” [34]. Viewing Marxism
and psychoanalysis as operating with homologous hermeneutics, Ricoeur probably would
agree
    ∨ ∨
       that “Marx invented the symptom,” though he would be less sanguine than Althusser
or Zizek about
            ∨ ∨
                 the implications of this homology.
     Like Zizek and Garber after him, Ricoeur focuses his examination of psychoanalytic
hermeneutics on The Interpretation of Dreams, particularly the mechanisms of distortion
that Freud names the “dream-work” (die Traumarbeit). We might recall that, according
to Freud, a dream is structured exactly like a symptom (“our procedure in interpreting
dreams is identical with the procedure by which we resolve hysterical symptoms”
[Interpretation 528]), and therefore to characterize aesthetic artifacts as cultural symptoms
implies that those artifacts are formed through the same mechanisms of distortion that
produce dreams. Indeed, the pervasive critical notion of “cultural work”—that is, the
kind of effects we often take literature to be performing unbeknownst to its authors—
derives by homology from this basic postulate of psychoanalytic hermeneutics, even
when those critics who employ it are more likely to regard themselves as practicing
Marxist rather than psychoanalytic criticism.16 Just as Garber initiates Symptoms of
Culture by claiming that her∨ method extends the hermeneutics outlined in The
                                  ∨
Interpretation of Dreams, so Zizek begins his explanation of how Marx invented the
symptom
 ∨ ∨
            by pursuing a disquisition on not symptoms but dreams. Following Freud,
Zizek insists that neither latent nor manifest contents of the dream should distract us


     Psychoanalysis does not apply to literature. Its attempts in doing so have always mani-
     fested their futility, their unfitness to lay the grounds for even the most meager literary
     judgment. Why? Because artistic works are not products of the unconscious. You can
     well interpret a novel or poem—i.e., make sense of it—but this sense has nothing to do
     with the creation of the work itself. This sense has no common measure with the work’s
     existence, and an enigma remains on the side of the existence of the work of art. This
     would even be a possible definition of the work in its relation to sense: it resists inter-
     pretation as much as it lends itself to interpretation. [214]

    15. For more progressive critiques of the hermeneutics of suspicion, see Armstrong; Sedgwick.
    16. For a representative range of instances, see Morris; Poovey; Reynolds and Hutner;
Tompkins.



diacritics / summer 2002                                                                           31
from the formal process of distortion performed by the dreamwork, since it is in that set
of formal transpositions, rather than in the hidden content, that unconscious desire is to
be found:

     We should not reduce the interpretation of dreams, or symptoms in general, to
     the retranslation of the “latent dream-thought” into the “normal,” everyday
     common language of intersubjective communication (Habermas’s formula).
     The structure is always triple; there are always three elements at work: the
     manifest dream-text, the latent dream-content or thought and the unconscious
     desire articulated in a dream. This desire attaches itself to the dream, it
     intercalates itself in the interspace between the latent thought and the manifest
     text; it is therefore not “more concealed, deeper” in relation to the latent
     thought, it is decidedly more “on the surface,” consisting entirely of the
     signifier’s mechanisms, of the treatment to which the latent thought is submitted.
     In other words, its only place is in the form of the “dream”: the real subject
     matter of the dream (the unconscious desire) articulates itself in the dream-
     work, in the elaboration of its “latent content.” [SO 13; original emphases]
                                                                      ∨ ∨
Accurately reprising Freud’s argument in Die Traumdeutung, Zizek brings out two
significant points. First, classical psychoanalytic hermeneutics is more properly formal
than generally is assumed, insofar as its interpretive ingenuity exercises itself upon the
distinctive mode of translating one set of ideas (the latent dream-thought) into another
set (the dream’s manifest content). Unconscious desire becomes visible in the set of
transformations that converts one content into another, rather than residing in either the
earlier (latent) or subsequent (manifest) representations.
      Second, by elaborating psychoanalytic hermeneutics as a kind of formalism in which
the
 ∨ ∨
     content of mental images remains utterly secondary when establishing their meaning,
Zizek also clarifies the distinction between psychoanalysis and depth psychology. If
meaning lies not in the latent dream-thought but in the mode of its transformation, then
the truth of desire must be located not in the hidden depths of subjective inwardness but
in the ostensibly superficial displacements that constitute the dreamwork. By thus
reorienting the surface-depth ∨ ∨
                                   model through which hermeneutics-as-demystification
conventionally operates, Zizek goes some distance toward countering critiques of
psychoanalysis as a metaphysics of the subject and hence as a hermeneutics of
demystification. It is by virtue of its attention to the literalness of verbal
                                                                          ∨ ∨
                                                                               utterances that
psychoanalysis may be distinguished from psychology. Although Zizek never makes
reference to Ricoeur’s important critique, he often claims that psychoanalytic
interpretation remains irreducible to demystification, insisting that “we must avoid the
simple metaphors of demasking, of throwing away the veils which are supposed to hide
the naked reality” [SO 28–29]. Indeed, he argues that the standard psychoanalytic critique
of ideology, which he associates with Althusser, “no longer works”: “We can no longer
subject the ideological text to ‘symptomatic reading,’ confronting it with its blank spots,
with what it must repress  ∨ ∨
                              to organize itself, to preserve its consistency” [SO 30]. At
moments such as these, Zizek’s   ∨ ∨
                                     argument appears to coincide with mine.
      The problem is that what Zizek counsels against—“simple metaphors of demasking,”
“‘symptomatic reading’”—turns out to be exactly the interpretive method and rhetoric
he adopts. He executes a twist on the standard critique of ideology as imaginary illusion,
yet remains caught within the terms of that critique, as when he argues that “ideology is
not a dreamlike illusion that we build to escape insupportable reality; in its basic
dimension it is a fantasy-construction which serves as a support for our ‘reality’ itself:
an ‘illusion’ which structures our effective, real social relations and thereby masks some




32
insupportable, real, impossible ∨kernel” [SO 45]. While neatly inverting the relation
                                     ∨
between ideology and reality, Zizek nevertheless retains the Nietzschean notion of
masking and thereby tacitly positions himself as the one who unmasks, the one who will
reveal
 ∨ ∨
        to us the “impossible” truth of social relations. This apparent inconsistency is not
Zizek’s problem as much as it is an inevitable consequence of his approach. Having
established his critical method
                             ∨ ∨
                                 in The Sublime Object of Ideology via a strictly Freudian
explication of dreamwork, Zizek remains caught within the logic of that hermeneutical
model, despite his claims to be moving beyond hermeneutics. By definition dreamwork—
or, analogically, cultural work, ideological work—is a process of distortion, and
psychoanalytic interpretation generally follows this process in reverse, tracking the formal
operations through which one scenario has been transformed into another. By tracing
backwards a procedure of distortion or disguise, psychoanalytic hermeneutics situates
itself in the realm of demystification. Even when its purpose is less to reveal a hidden
content than to lay bare the surface mechanisms by which that content appears to have
been hidden, psychoanalytic interpretation still represents a method of unconcealment.17
And while it redefines what truth consists in, Lacanian psychoanalysis holds onto the
notion that some form of interpretation is required to access subjective truth.


The Psychoanalytic Critique of Hermeneutics

It might appear that psychoanalysis, inaugurated as a science of interpretation, could
never escape the fundamental presuppositions of hermeneutics within whose terms
Ricoeur and others have discussed it. After all, isn’t it the psychoanalytic zeal for
interpretation that licenses—even for Freud himself—rapid extensions of its method
from the clinical to the cultural domain? Yet two versions of psychoanalytic thought
insist that it should not be understood as a hermeneutic; Jean Laplanche has gone so far
as to argue that psychoanalysis
                       ∨ ∨
                                     should be recognized as an antihermeneutic. By
considering further Zizek’s and Laplanche’s implicit and explicit refutations of Ricoeur,
I want to challenge the basic assumption that a clinical method of interpretation can be
readily transposed to the cultural realm. In other words, I want to take seriously the
proposition that a certain style of psychoanalytic thinking represents a break with
hermeneutics; but I also want to show how this break undermines the otherwise nearly
irresistible logic whereby a clinical practice is extended to social and cultural analysis.
On the basis of that argument, I shall suggest how Althusser might be articulated with
Laplanche for the purpose of constructing a quite different psychoanalytic approach to
aesthetics.
      ∨ ∨
     Zizek’s critique of hermeneutics objects to the assumption that everything can be
translated into meaning, that full integration into the circuit of intersubjective   ∨ ∨
communication is possible in principle. Opposing Habermas’s reading of Freud, Zizek
contends that the former’s understanding of interpretation overlooks the “traumatic
kernel” that constitutively resists translation into sense. “Here we confront the
incommensurability ∨ ∨
                        between hermeneutics (‘deep’ as it may be) and psychoanalytic
interpretation,” Zizek argues, since “Habermas can assert that distortions have meaning
as such—what remains unthinkable for him is that meaning as such results from a certain
distortion—that the emergence of meaning is based on a disavowal of some ‘primordially
repressed’ traumatic kernel” [Metastases 27; original emphases]. By focusing on that
                              ∨ ∨
      17. See Miklitsch: “If Ziz ek’s program cannot be labeled a ‘hermeneutics of suspicion’ (if
only because he has so little use for hermeneutics proper and, more importantly perhaps, because
of a certain comic, even Chaplinesque, strain in his work), it is a politics of demystification for all
that” [486].



diacritics / summer 2002                                                                            33
                                                       ∨ ∨
which resists meaning (in other words, the real), Zizek aims to distinguish psychoanalytic
interpretation from hermeneutics. In this respect he follows Lacan, who argues that
psychoanalytic interpretation directs the patient to what cannot be interpreted, that which
hermeneutics fails to grasp. As he explains in The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho-
Analysis:

     Interpretation is not open to any meaning. This would be to concede to those
     who rise up against the character of uncertainty in analytic interpretation that,
     in effect, all interpretations are possible, which is patently absurd. The fact
     that I have said that the effect of interpretation is to isolate in the subject a
     kernel, a kern, to use Freud’s own term, of non-sense, does not mean that
     interpretation is in itself nonsense. . . .
           Interpretation is not open to all meanings. It is not just any interpretation.
     It is a significant interpretation, one that must not be missed. This does not
     mean that it is not this signification that is essential to the advent of the subject.
     What is essential is that he should see, beyond this signification, to what
     signifier—to what irreducible, traumatic, non-meaning—he is, as a subject,
     subjected. [250–51; original emphases]

For interpretation to point not toward meaning or signification but “beyond . . .
signification” pushes interpretation—paradoxically enough—beyond the framework of
hermeneutics. Rather than making sense of trauma, psychoanalytic interpretation draws
attention to its resistance to sense. In the clinical setting, then, interpretation represents
something quite different from what hermeneutics conventionally understands by this
term.
     Laplanche develops a related critique of hermeneutics by centering his account of
human subjectivity—and hence of analytic technique—on the enigmatic signifier, a
term he borrows from Lacan to designate a kind of resistance to meaning that roughly
corresponds with the Lacanian real (or, more precisely, corresponds with the real as an
effect internal to the symbolic). It is from a sentence I quoted earlier, in which Lacan
defines the symptom as a corporeal metaphor, that Laplanche takes this term. Here is
the complete—and completely slippery—sentence: “Between the enigmatic signifier of
the sexual trauma and the term that is substituted for it in an actual signifying chain
there passes the spark that fixes in a symptom the signification inaccessible to the
conscious subject in which that symptom may be resolved—a symptom being a metaphor
in which flesh or function is taken as a signifying element” [Lacan, “Agency” 166;
emphasis added].18 Somewhat akin to this typically Lacanian sentence, the enigmatic
signifier poses as meaningful yet irreducibly opaque—“inaccessible,” as Lacan says
here. It does not form part of a signifying chain but instead causes something else to
take its place; the enigmatic signifier therefore isn’t a signifier in any general acceptance
of the term. While coining other terms (such as message) that are intended to be
synonymous with, and thus to clarify, that of enigmatic signifier, Laplanche generalizes
this concept, making it the cornerstone of his own distinctive psychoanalytic theory.
Through elaborations of this idea, he has devoted much of his career to refuting Ricoeur’s
phenomenological reading of Freud. ∨
                                              ∨
     Yet it is with more than simply a Zizekian notion of the resistance to sense that
Laplanche launches his refutation of Ricoeur. In sharp contrast to the Habermasian

     18. “Entre le signifiant énigmatique du trauma sexuel et le terme à quoi il vient se substituer
dans une chaîne signifiante actuelle, passe l’étincelle, qui fixe dans un symptôme,—métaphore
où la chair ou bien la fonction sont prises comme élément signifiant,—la signification inacces-
sible au sujet conscient où il peut se résoudre” [Écrits 518].



34
paradigm of intersubjective communication, Laplanche pictures the origins of
intersubjectivity in unintelligible communications; his norm for human relations is not
simply misunderstanding (an idea that Habermas can accommodate easily enough), but
more fundamentally communications that are understood by neither party. In other words,
the enigmatic signifier remains enigmatic because it remains unconscious. As Laplanche
explains when glossing this concept, “If I had to give up the term ‘enigmatic’ to my
objectors, I should then coin the expression ‘compromised signifier,’ in the dual sense
that it is a compromise, like the symptom, as well as being compromised by the
unconscious of its originator” [“Interpretation” 158; original emphases]. In his reference
to the symptom as a compromise formation, Laplanche harks back to the passage in
which Lacan coins the term enigmatic signifier to explain symptom formation. He also
emphasizes that intersubjectivity begins when human relations are at their most
asymmetrical, inasmuch as children are surrounded by adults who already have an
unconscious. It is not simply that an infant, whose cognitive skills are incompletely
developed, fails to understand everything adults communicate to him or her; rather it is
a question of how adults handling a child communicate messages they themselves do
not understand and of which they are not aware. Laplanche calls this process generalized
seduction. In so doing, he revives the seduction theory that Freud abandoned in 1897,
while abstracting the idea of seduction from a contingent event and transforming it into
the necessary condition of intersubjectivity. It is by virtue of receiving unintelligible
messages from the other that one is seduced into relationality.19
      Laplanche identifies his general theory of seduction as “the foundation of
psychoanalytic anti-hermeneutics”: the enigmatic signifier thwarts interpretation even
as it prompts it [Laplanche, “Psychoanalysis” 7]. He justifies this claim by not only
locating the origins of intersubjectivity in that which resists meaning, but also arguing
that the practice of analysis consists in working against rather than toward the consolations
of sense. Engaging Ricoeur on his own turf—that of an account of psychoanalytic
hermeneutics based on reading The Interpretation of Dreams—Laplanche shows how
the original edition of this seminal work broke with hermeneutics by outlining a method
that refused all syntheses of meaning. It was only in later editions (published after 1900),
he suggests, that hermeneutical codes of symbolism and typicality were added to the
text, in its burgeoning footnotes, addenda, and interpolations. Laplanche connects this
eclipsing of Freud’s original insights—by Freud himself—with his abandonment of the
seduction theory during the same period. As throughout his work, Laplanche reads the
Freudian corpus in terms of an intellectual recentering whereby the most refractory
ideas are disciplined by subsequent revisions that serve to conceal the radical implications
of the unconscious’s decentering of subjective life. This intellectual recentering mimes
the subjective centripetalism accomplished by the human ego, which in good dialectical
fashion synthesizes, (mis)recognizes, and comprehends.
      Countering this synthesizing agency, the method of free association breaks things
down, dispersing attention in multiple, often contradictory directions. The free associative
method represents Freud’s greatest discovery, according to Laplanche, because it is a
method correlative to its object—the unconscious. Laplanche is fascinated by those
passages in The Interpretation of Dreams where for pages and pages Freud laboriously
traces the associations of discrete components of a single brief dream (such as the famous
dream of Irma’s injection), without ever gathering together these associations into a

     19. With respect to the question of the genealogical relation between Lacanian and
Laplanchean psychoanalyses, it is notable that Laplanche connects this seduction-through-enigma
                                                                         ∨ ∨
to the enigmatic solicitation from the Other that Lacan discusses—and Ziz ek elaborates—using
the phrase Che vuoi? (What∨does it want from me?). See Lacan, “Subversion” 312–13; Laplanche,
                              ∨
“Interpretation” 146–47; Ziz ek, Sublime 110–21.



diacritics / summer 2002                                                                    35
final meaning or interpretation. It is Freud’s reluctance to specify one-to-one
correspondences—his refusal to say: “the dream means X”—that permits Laplanche to
argue that the associative method represents a break with hermeneutics. Rather than
building up meaning, the analytic method breaks it down. But this antihermeneutical
approach is domesticated by Freud’s invention of dream symbolism (in which X means
Y), typical dreams, and the complexes or scenarios (Oedipus, etc.) that Freud attempts
to establish as the bedrock of unconscious significance. Laplanche regards dream
symbolism and the predetermined meaning of family complexes as betrayals of the
psychoanalytic method.20 Symbolism and paradigmatic stories tell you what the enigma
means, when the significance of the enigmatic signifier lies in the fact that you can
never know what it means, since although it may be transmitted at least partly through
discourse it does not pertain to the order of sense.


Mastering Engimas

A placeholder for that which defies sense, the enigmatic signifier both provokes and
stymies interpretation. Laplanche views interpretation in the hermeneutical sense as a
strategy directed toward mastering the other’s enigma; by contrast psychoanalytic
interpretation involves an effort to disrupt the forms of mastery with which we’ve made
sense of our own and others’ desires. The technique of free association remains
indispensable to this enterprise because it fragments sense rather than maintaining its
coherence. For Laplanche the antihermeneutical technique that accompanies free
association consists in interpretation stripped down to pointing—a kind of pointing that
works to punctuate the subject’s discourse, cutting it into its discrete components:

     [T]he analyst’s interpretation correlates exactly with the free associations,
     whose course it merely punctuates by emphasizing their overlaps or nodal
     points. . . . The German deuten, Deutung, is here much more eloquent, and
     much less “hermeneutic” than our word “interpretation”: deuten auf means
     to indicate with a finger or with the eyes—“to point,” as the Lacanians would
     say. [“Interpretation” 162]

By simply pointing to elements of the subject’s discourse, an analyst practicing
antihermeneutical interpretation attempts to punctuate that discourse and thereby
introduce some space into preexistent organizations of meaning. The controversial
Lacanian practice of variable length sessions makes the temporal frame of analysis
available for this punctuating work, since the choice of when to end a session marks as
especially significant whatever has preceded that moment by introducing a caesura into
the flow of discourse. In this way the end of each session is deroutinized and opened to
greater reflection.
     Here I’m interested less in debating the merits of Lacan’s technical innovation than
in distinguishing between interpretation as translation into another register of sense and
interpretation as a form of minimalist punctuation that equivocates sense. Ultimately,
however, my concern lies with whether or how the antihermeneuticist version of
psychoanalytic interpretation can be transferred to the cultural realm. What I find so
promising for cultural studies about Laplanche’s theory of the enigmatic signifier is its
insistence on the irreducibility of the enigma, its principled refusal to assimilate everything

    20. “Reading through symbolism and typicality does not stimulate the associative method,”
Laplanche insists; “when one is present, the other is absent, and vice versa. . . . It is symbolism
which silences association” [“Psychoanalysis” 9; original emphasis].



36
diacritics / summer 2002   37
to the empire of sense. Although cultural studies (especially in its postcolonialist variants)
has elaborated an ethical commitment to honoring the alterity of other cultures and their
subjects—that is, a commitment to respecting the various ways in which different cultural
ontologies might not make sense within the terms of hegemonic discourse—there has
been less willingness to extend this ethical commitment to the aesthetic realm as such.
Thus although social practices guided by the principle of others’ autonomy tend to be
regarded as politically desirable, the possibility of according relative autonomy to
something designated “art” tends to be regarded as politically suspect. Progressive critics
claim to accept the impossibility of mastering the enigmas of other persons and other
cultures, yet seem unable to accept the impossibility of fully mastering the enigmas of
the aesthetic domain. While we try to respect the otherness of other persons, our
interpretive practices do not respect the otherness of art. It is as if art needed to come
from an alien culture before we could concede that some aspect of it remains
untranslatable into meaning.
      Insofar as it is transmitted discursively, the enigmatic signifier pertains not only to
intersubjective relations but also to aesthetic relations; irreducible engimas haunt our
aesthetic experience as well as affecting our involvement with other persons.
Extrapolating from Laplanche, I would suggest that as soon as one conceives alterity in
symbolic terms, one sees that otherness exceeds intersubjective and intercultural
dynamics; otherness is a property of discourse, and the enigmas of otherness are
exacerbated by art. We might even say that art’s purpose lies in intensifying those aspects
of alterity that otherwise remain dormant in everyday discourse and conventional
intersubjective communication. From this perspective, the disruption of normative
communication would signal a proximity to aesthetic experience, and art would be defined
less as the secluded reserve of high culture than as the practice or experience of disruption
through which something like the enigmatic signifier becomes palpable.
      Of course, this definition represents a peculiarly modernist understanding of art—
one whose institutionalization generated the shibboleth of aesthetic autonomy in the
first place. But whereas the New Critical account of aesthetic autonomy entailed a view
of art as harmoniously self-enclosed and ontologically distinct from mass culture, the
psychoanalytic account of relative autonomy entails a view of art as disrupting
harmonious self-enclosures of all kinds, and as troubling rather than reinforcing the
boundary between high and low cultural forms. If we call “aesthetic” those experiences
in which meaning is disrupted
                           ∨ ∨
                                   by an encounter with alterity, then the products of mass
culture so beloved by Zizek may give rise to an experience whose relative autonomy
from normative coordinates of sense requires acknowledging.21 By reading Althusser
through Laplanche, I am suggesting that the concept of relative autonomy pertains to
not only cultural production but also cultural reception: relative autonomy at the level
of reception implies a fundamental irreducibility to sense or understanding. Putting this
matter at its most schematic, I would say that Laplanche’s concept of the enigmatic
signifier rewrites at the level of reception what Althusser meant by relative autonomy.
      To the extent that art entails a practice or experience of defamiliarization in which
otherness comes to the fore, it requires an ethical rather than an epistemological approach.
From this perspective the ethics of psychoanalytic criticism would consist in refusing

                                                                                           ∨ ∨
     21. Here I find myself in sympathy with Tom Cohen’s deconstructive critique of Ziz ek as
inattentive to the textual materiality
                                    ∨ ∨
                                         of the Hitchcock films he discusses: in attempting to go
beyond the symbolic to the real, Ziz ek overlooks Hitchcock’s experiments with language, thereby
reinscribing a fairly traditional method of film criticism that emphasizes the auteur, characters in
the diegesis, the immediacy of the cinematic image, and suchlike [Cohen, “Beyond”]. It is un-
doubtedly
      ∨ ∨
           the case that Cohen’s readings of individual Hitchcock movies are far more interesting
than Ziz ek’s, despite the latter’s enthusiasm.



38
the imperative to overcome all enigmaticity through demystification. Such an ethics
would encourage us to adopt a less knowingly superior attitude toward art by helping to
allay the suspicion that meaning and motive lie concealed behind aesthetic expressions.
In Lacanian terms, this would entail criticism registering the effects of the real on
interpretation, rather than thematizing the real through interpretations that use aesthetic
artifacts to illustrate psychoanalytic concepts.22 The hermeneutics of suspicion that
characterizes interpretive practices running the gamut from psychoanalytic to materialist
to historicist criticism promotes a paranoid relation to cultural forms, fueling the impulse
to critically master opacity or uncertainty through rigorous interpretation. But just as
psychoanalysis indubitably contributes to this project by way of its theories of a cultural
unconscious and attendant cultural symptoms, so too can psychoanalysis make us less
paranoid, less insistent on uncovering meaning and significance everywhere we turn.
Psychoanalysis can help us tolerate resistances to meaning by enabling us to appreciate
how enigmas aren’t always puzzles to be decoded or obstacles to be overcome, but
instead represent an ineliminable condition of existence. Thus whereas the concept of
the unconscious licenses a critical commitment to demystification, the concept of the
enigmatic signifier puts the brake on demystification.
     Having claimed that the enigmatic signifier remains enigmatic because it remains
unconscious, I want in closing to differentiate the implications for cultural criticism of
the concept of the unconscious from those of the enigmatic signifier. The notion of the
enigmatic signifier seems preferable for cultural criticism to that of the unconscious,
since whereas the latter indexes a general limit to our intentional agency, the former
indexes a more specific limit to our hermeneutic agency. It is particularly important to
acknowledge the limits of interpretation when working in the aesthetic domain, and
thence to see how one’s relation to aesthetic experience may be ethical before it is
epistemological. Diagnosing aesthetic artifacts as cultural symptoms tends to preempt
the possibility of any such ethical consideration. Although my previous work has
strenuously emphasized the need for cultural theory to retain a radically psychoanalytic
concept of the unconscious as that which disrupts subjective and sexual norms, I have
become skeptical about the viability for literary studies of a concept such as the cultural
unconscious. The concept of the unconscious licenses interpretation as an interminable
enterprise that permanently defers analysis of the disruptive impact aesthetic experience
may have on us.23 “Interpretation of a literary work is endless,” maintains Jacqueline
Rose in an exemplary work of psychoanalytic literary criticism [ix]; but the enigmatic
signifier holds the potential to halt interpretation and thus to reorient the focus of criticism.
If psychoanalysis has∨a future that consists in more than merely repeating itself in ever
                          ∨
varying contexts à la Zizek, then interpretation may prove negligible to what we want to
say next about art.

                                    WORKS CITED
Althusser, Louis. “Contradiction and Overdetermination: Notes for an Investigation.”
      1962. For Marx. Trans. Ben Brewster. London: Verso, 1990. 87–127.
________
        . Writings on Psychoanalysis: Freud and Lacan. Ed. Olivier Corpet and François
      Matheron. Trans. Jeffrey Mehlman. New York: Columbia UP, 1996.

      22. This distinction marks the distance between what might be regarded∨ as an ethics of the
                                                               ∨ ∨                ∨
real that I’m advocating and that proposed by Alenka Zupanc ic , who follows Ziz ek in thematizing
                                                                                 ∨ ∨
the real-as-impossible within the Kantian philosophical tradition [see Zupanc ic ].
      23. Although space prevents me from doing justice to Jameson’s psychoanalytic Marxism
here, by this point it should be clear that my critique is aimed also at the highly influential para-
digm set forth in The Political Unconscious. While from a literary critical perspective it may be
politically desirable to “always historicize” (as Jameson urges), ethically it may not invariably
be so.



diacritics / summer 2002                                                                          39
Althusser, Louis, and Étienne Balibar. Reading Capital. Trans. Ben Brewster. London:
      Verso, 1979.
Armstrong, Isobel. The Radical Aesthetic. Oxford: Blackwell, 2000.
Barrett, Michèle. “Althusser’s Marx, Althusser’s Lacan.” The Althusserian Legacy. Ed.
      E. Ann Kaplan and Michael Sprinkler. London: Verso, 1993. 169–82.
Bellamy, Elizabeth J. “Discourses of Impossibility: Can Psychoanalysis Be Political?”
      Diacritics 23.1 (1993): 24–38.
Butler, Judith. “Arguing with the Real.” Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits
      of ‘Sex.’ New York: Routledge, 1993. 187–222.
________
         . The Psychic Life of Power: Theories∨ in Subjection. Stanford: Stanford UP, 1997.
                                                 ∨
Butler, Judith, Ernesto Laclau, and Slavoj Zizek. Contingency, Hegemony, Universality:
      Contemporary Dialogues on the Left. London: Verso, 2000.
Chow, Rey. “Ethics after Idealism.” Diacritics
                                           ∨ ∨
                                                     23.1 (1993): 3–22.
Cohen, Tom. “Beyond ‘The Gaze’: Zizek, Hitchcock, and the American Sublime.”
      American Literary History 7.2 (1995): 350–78.
Dean, Tim. “Bodies That Mutter.” Beyond Sexuality. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2000.
      174–214.
________
          . “Homosexuality and the Problem of Otherness.” Homosexuality and
      Psychoanalysis. Ed. Tim Dean and Christopher Lane. Chicago: U of Chicago P,
      2001. 120–43.
Derrida, Jacques. “The Purveyor of Truth.” Trans. Alan Bass. Muller and Richardson
      173-212.
Freud, Sigmund. Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety. 1926. Standard Edition 20: 75–
      172.
________
         . The Interpretation of Dreams. 1900. Vols. 4–5 of Standard Edition.
________
         . The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud.
      Ed. and trans. James Strachey. London: Hogarth, 1953–74.
Garber, Marjorie. Symptoms of Culture.       New York: Routledge, 1998.
                                           ∨ ∨
Guerra, Gustavo. “Thinking Aslant: Zizek and Pragmatism.” JPCS: Journal for the
      Psychoanalysis of Culture and Society 6.1 (2001): 21–28.
Jameson, Fredric. The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially Symbolic Act.
      Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1981.
Lacan, Jacques. “The Agency of the Letter in the Unconscious, or Reason since Freud.”
      1957. Écrits: A Selection 146–78.
________
         . Écrits. Paris: Seuil, 1966.
________
         . Écrits: A Selection. Trans. Alan Sheridan. New York: Norton, 1977.
________
         . The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho-Analysis. Ed. Jacques-Alain Miller.
      Trans. Alan Sheridan. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1979.
________
         . “The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis.” 1953.
      Écrits: A Selection 30–113.
________
         . Le séminaire, livre VII: L’éthique de la psychanalyse. Ed. Jacques-Alain Miller.
      Paris: Seuil, 1986. [The Seminar of Jacques Lacan, Book 7: The Ethics of
      Psychoanalysis, 1959–1960. Ed. Jacques-Alain Miller. Trans. Dennis Porter. New
      York: Norton, 1992.]
________
         . The Seminar of Jacques Lacan, Book 2: The Ego in Freud’s Theory and in the
      Technique of Psychoanalysis, 1954–1955. Ed. Jacques-Alain Miller. Trans. Sylvana
      Tomaselli. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1988.
________
         . “Seminar on ‘The Purloined Letter.’” 1955–56. Trans. Jeffrey Mehlman. Muller
      and Richardson 28–54.
________
         . “The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire in the Freudian
      Unconscious.” 1960. Écrits: A Selection 292–325.
Laclau, Ernesto. New Reflections on the Revolution of Our Time. London: Verso, 1990.


40
________
        . “Theory, Democracy, and the Left: An Interview with Ernesto Laclau” (conducted
      by Carlos Pessoa, Marta Hernández, Seoungwon Lee, and Lasse Thomassen).
      Umbr(a): A Journal of the Unconscious (2001): 7–27.
Laclau, Ernesto, and Chantal Mouffe. Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards a
      Radical Democratic Politics. Trans. Winston Moore and Paul Cammack. London:
      Verso, 1985.
Laplanche, Jean. “Interpretation between Determinism and Hermeneutics: A Restatement
      of the Problem.” Trans. Philip Slotkin. Essays on Otherness. Ed. John Fletcher.
      London: Routledge, 1999. 138–65.
________
         . “Psychoanalysis as Anti-Hermeneutics.” Radical Philosophy 79 (1996): 7–12.
Laplanche, Jean, and J.-B. Pontalis. The Language of Psycho-Analysis. Trans. Donald
      Nicholson-Smith. New York: Norton, 1973.
Meltzer, Françoise. “Introduction: Partitive Plays, Pipe Dreams.” The Trial(s) of
      Psychoanalysis. Ed. Meltzer. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1988. 1–7.
Menand, Louis. “Faith, Hope, and Clarity.” New Yorker 16 Sept. 2002:∨ ∨
                                                                          98–104.
Miklitsch, Robert. “‘Going through the Fantasy’: Screening Slavoj Zizek.” South Atlantic
      Quarterly 97.2 (1998): 475–507.
Morris, Timothy. Making the Team: The Cultural Work of Baseball Fiction. Urbana: U
      of Illinois P, 1997.
Muller, John P., and William J. Richardson, eds. The Purloined Poe: Lacan, Derrida,
      and Psychoanalytic Reading. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1988.
Phillips, Adam. Houdini’s Box: The Art of Escape. New York: Pantheon, 2001.
Poovey, Mary. Uneven Developments: The Ideological Work of Gender in Mid-Victorian
      England. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1988.
                                            ∨ ∨
Resch, Robert Paul. “Running on Empty: Zizek’s Concept of the Subject.” JPCS: Journal
      for the Psychoanalysis of Culture
                                    ∨ ∨
                                         and Society 4.1 (1999): 92–99.
________
        . “The Sound of Sci(l)ence: Zizek’s Concept of Ideology-Critique.” JPCS: Journal
      for the Psychoanalysis of Culture and Society 6.1 (2001): 6–20.
Reynolds, Larry J., and Gordon Hutner, eds. National Imaginaries, American Identities:
      The Cultural Work of American Iconography. Princeton: Princeton UP, 2000.
Ricoeur, Paul. Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation. 1965. Trans. Denis
      Savage. New Haven: Yale UP, 1970.
Rose, Jacqueline. The Haunting of Sylvia Plath. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1992.
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. “Paranoid Reading and Reparative Reading; or, You’re So
      Paranoid, You Probably Think This Introduction Is about You.” Novel Gazing: Queer
      Readings in Fiction. Ed. Sedgwick. Durham: Duke UP, 1997. 1–37.
Soler, Colette. “Literature as Symptom.” Lacan and the Subject of Language. Ed. Ellie
      Ragland-Sullivan and Mark Bracher. New York: Routledge, 1991. 213–19.
Tompkins, Jane. Sensational Designs: The Cultural Work of American Fiction, 1790–
 ∨ ∨
      1860. New York: Oxford UP, 1985.
Zizek, Slavoj. “Beyond Discourse-Analysis.” Laclau, New Reflections 249–60.
________
         . Enjoy Your Symptom! Jacques Lacan in Hollywood and Out. New York:
      Routledge, 1992.
________
         . The Metastases of Enjoyment: Six Essays on Woman and Causality. London:
      Verso, 1994.
________
         . The Sublime Object of Ideology. London: Verso, 1989. [SO]
________
         . “The Undergrowth of Enjoyment: How Popular Culture Can Serve as an
      Introduction to Lacan.” New Formations 9 (1989): 7–29.
________
         . Welcome to the Desert of the Real: Five Essays on September 11 and Related
      Dates. London: Verso, 2002.
          ∨ ∨
Zupancic, Alenka. Ethics of the Real: Kant, Lacan, London: Verso, 2000.




diacritics / summer 2002                                                             41
