== *udev rules* ==

1. *Identify the USB Device:*
*vendor ID* *product ID*
`lsusb`

2. **Create a Udev Rule:**
   Create a new udev rule file (e.g., `/etc/udev/rules.d/my_usb_rule.rules`) with the following content:
   ```bash
   # Replace <vendor_id> and <product_id> with the actual values
   ATTRS{idVendor}=="<vendor_id>", ATTRS{idProduct}=="<product_id>", RUN+="/path/to/your/script.sh"
   ```
   In the above rule, replace `<vendor_id>` and `<product_id>` with the actual IDs of your USB device. Also, replace `/path/to/your/script.sh` with the path to the script you want to execute.

3. **Create Your Script:**
   Create the script (e.g., `/path/to/your/script.sh`) that you want to run when the USB device is connected. Make sure the script is executable (`chmod +x /path/to/your/script.sh`). For example:
   ```bash
   #!/bin/bash
   echo "USB device connected: $DEVNAME" >> /var/log/usb_events.log
   # Add your custom commands here
   ```

4. **Reload Udev Rules:**
   After creating the rule, reload the udev rules using:
   ```bash
   sudo udevadm control --reload-rules
   ```

5. **Plug in the USB Device:**
   Plug in the USB device, and udev should trigger your script.

6. **Check the Log:**
   The output of your script will be logged to `/var/log/usb_events.log`.

Remember to replace placeholders like `<vendor_id>` and `<product_id>` with the actual values specific to your USB device. Adjust the script inside your `script.sh` file to perform the desired actions when the USB device is connected. 🚀

Keep in mind that udev rules execute as root, so ensure your script handles permissions and security appropriately. If you want to run the script as a regular user, consider using `sudo -u <username>` in your script to switch to the desired user context.

Source: Conversation with Bing, 3/19/2024
(1) How to execute a shellscript when I plug-in a USB-device. https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/65891/how-to-execute-a-shellscript-when-i-plug-in-a-usb-device.
(2) How to run a script when a specific flash-drive is mounted?. https://askubuntu.com/questions/25071/how-to-run-a-script-when-a-specific-flash-drive-is-mounted.
(3) Autorun a script after I plugged or unplugged a USB device. https://askubuntu.com/questions/284224/autorun-a-script-after-i-plugged-or-unplugged-a-usb-device.
