
                               nixCraftnixCraft
     nixCraft → Howto → Linux → How to Restart Network Interface in Linux

How to Restart Network Interface in Linux

Author: Vivek Gite Last updated: April 9, 2024 9 comments
See all GNU/Linux related FAQSee all GNU/Linux related FAQ
How do I restart the network interface under Linux operating systems after
making changes to IP configuration without rebooting the server?

You can restart the networking service in Linux using various command. Use the
following commands as per your Linux distribution to restart the networking
service. You must run the command as root user either using sudo or su
commands. The ifup command bring a network interface up. The ifdown command
take a network interface down. You must be careful with ifdown command if you
are using it over SSH based session.

                               Tutorial details
Difficulty level    Easy
Root privileges     Yes
Requirements        Linux terminal
Category            Processes Management
Prerequisites       Linux distribution
                    AlmaLinux • Alpine • Arch • Debian • Fedora • Mint •
OS compatibility    openSUSE • Pop!_OS • RHEL • Rocky • Slackware • Stream •
                    SUSE • Ubuntu • WSL
Est. reading time   3 minutes

Restart Network Interface Using Command Lines in Linux (generic method)

WARNING! These examples may result in loss of networking connectivity when run
over ssh based sessions. Therefore for remote servers, use a console provided
by your cloud service provider or IPMI. The nixCraft or author is not
responsible for data loss.

First, you can get a list of network interfaces on Linux using the ip command
(or ifconfig command):
$ ip link show
$ ifconfig -a
Then, the procedure to to turn off eth0 interface is as follows (replace the
eth0 with your actual name). Run:
# ifdown eth0
To turn on eth0 interface run:
# ifup eth0
See ip address info using the ip command:
# ip a show eth0
Restart Network Interface Using Command Lines in LinuxRestart Network Interface
Using Command Lines in Linux
If you get error such as ifup or ifdown command not found, then use the ip
command to turn off and on interface named eth0 or enp0s31f6:
$ sudo ip link set enp0s31f6 down
$ sudo ip link set enp0s31f6 up
$ sudo ip link show enp0s31f6
Here is an example for eth0 interface:
$ sudo ip link set eth0 down
$ sudo ip link set eth0 up
$ sudo ip link show eth0
Finally, most Linux distro with systemd and NetworkManager supports the nmcli
command to restart network interface. Here is syntax to restart the enp0s31f6
interfaces:
$ sudo nmcli connection down enp0s31f6
$ sudo nmcli connection up enp0s31f6
$ ip link show enp0s31f6

Debian / Ubuntu Linux restart network interface

Use the following command to find out if you are using systemd networkd service
, or networking or NetworkManager as service name with the systemd:
$ systemctl list-unit-files --type=service --state=enabled
$ systemctl list-unit-files --type=service --state=enabled | grep network
Here is what I see on Debian Linux version 12 (systemd-networkd.service is the
active service name):

systemd-network-generator.service    enabled enabled
systemd-networkd-wait-online.service enabled disabled
systemd-networkd.service             enabled enabled

Hence, the command to restart depends upon your version of Debian Linux. The
latest version of Debian or Ubuntu Linux distro with systemd networkd service
can use the following command:
$ sudo systemctl restart systemd-networkd.service
$ sudo systemctl status systemd-networkd.service
Debian/Ubuntu Linux with networking services, run:
$ sudo systemctl restart networking
$ sudo systemctl status networking
The latest version of Ubuntu or Debian service name changed to NetworkManager.
Hence, use the systemctl command as follows:
$ sudo systemctl restart NetworkManager
$ sudo systemctl status NetworkManager
On older (pre systemd) restart network interface, enter:
$ sudo /etc/init.d/networking restart
To stop and start use the following option (do not run them over remote ssh
session as you will get disconnected):
$ sudo /etc/init.d/networking stop
$ sudo /etc/init.d/networking start

Redhat (RHEL) / CentOS / Fedora / Suse / OpenSuse Linux – Restart network
interface in Linux

To restart network interface, enter:
# /etc/init.d/network restart
To stop and start use the following option (do not run them over remote ssh
session as you will get disconnected):
# /etc/init.d/network stop
# /etc/init.d/network start
Fedora/RHEL/CentOS/Suse Linux with systemd, run:
$ sudo systemctl restart network
Again, The latest version of RHEL/CentOS/Rocy/Alma Linux service name changed
to NetworkManager. Hence, use the systemctl command as follows:
$ sudo systemctl restart NetworkManager

Slackware Linux restart commands

Type the following command:
# /etc/rc.d/rc.inet1 restart
You can take down or restart particular interface such as eth1 as follows:
# /etc/rc.d/rc.inet1 eth1_restart
# /etc/rc.d/rc.inet1 eth1_start ### start eth1 ###
# /etc/rc.d/rc.inet1 eth1_stop ##stop eth1 ###

How to see status of network/networking service

Run command as per your Linux distro version:
# CentOS/RHEL/Fedora/Rocky/Alma Linux #
$ systemctl status network #old
$ systemctl status NetworkManager #new
# Debian/Ubuntu/Linux mint and co #
$ systemctl status networking #old
$ systemctl status NetworkManager #new
# Suse/OpenSUSE Linux #
$ systemctl status network
# Alpine Linux #
# service networking status
Sample outputs from OpenSUSE:

* wicked.service - wicked managed network interfaces
   Loaded: loaded (/usr/lib/systemd/system/wicked.service; enabled; vendor preset: disabled)
   Active: active (exited) since Sat 2018-01-13 06:40:25 UTC; 1 weeks 3 days ago
  Process: 93 ExecStart=/usr/sbin/wicked --systemd ifup all (code=exited, status=0/SUCCESS)
 Main PID: 93 (code=exited, status=0/SUCCESS)
    Tasks: 0 (limit: 512)
   CGroup: /system.slice/wicked.service
 
Jan 13 06:40:10 opensuse systemd[1]: Starting wicked managed network interfaces...
Jan 13 06:40:25 opensuse wicked[93]: lo              up
Jan 13 06:40:25 opensuse wicked[93]: eth0            up
Jan 13 06:40:25 opensuse systemd[1]: Started wicked managed network interfaces.

To see info about your ip address run:
# ifconfig -a
OR
$ ip a
$ ip a show
$ ip a show eth1

How to restart the networking service on Gentoo

Run the following for eth0:
# /etc/init.d/net.eth0 restart

Restating networking service on Alpine Linux

Use the service command:
# service networking restart
# OR #
# /etc/init.d/networking restart

Arch Linux restart networking

Use the systemd-networkd.service on your Arch Linux. For example, on Linode
cloud server, I use the following commands:
# Restart it #
$ sudo systemctl restart systemd-networkd.service
# Get the status #
$ systemctl status systemd-networkd.service
Sample outputs:

● systemd-networkd.service - Network Configuration
     Loaded: loaded (/usr/lib/systemd/system/systemd-networkd.service; enabled;>
     Active: active (running) since Tue 2022-02-15 19:58:13 UTC; 3 days ago
TriggeredBy: ● systemd-networkd.socket
       Docs: man:systemd-networkd.service(8)
   Main PID: 245 (systemd-network)
     Status: "Processing requests..."
      Tasks: 1 (limit: 4690)
     Memory: 3.0M
        CPU: 1min 41.703s
     CGroup: /system.slice/systemd-networkd.service
             └─245 /usr/lib/systemd/systemd-networkd

Feb 15 19:58:12 localhost systemd-networkd[245]: lo: Link UP
Feb 15 19:58:12 localhost systemd-networkd[245]: lo: Gained carrier
Feb 15 19:58:12 localhost systemd-networkd[245]: Enumeration completed
Feb 15 19:58:13 localhost systemd[1]: Started Network Configuration.
Feb 15 19:58:13 localhost systemd-networkd[245]: eth0: Link UP
Feb 15 19:58:13 localhost systemd-networkd[245]: eth0: Gained carrier
Feb 15 19:58:14 localhost systemd-networkd[245]: eth0: Gained IPv6LL
Notice: journal has been rotated since unit was started, output may be incomple

Summing up

Over the years, Linux distros changed the way we manage networking services. I
hope this guide helps you. If your Linux distro is not mentioned or the command
is not working, post it below and I will reply you. For more info see the
following manual pages using the help command or man command:
$ man service
$ man systemctl

nixCrat Tux Pixel PenguinnixCrat Tux Pixel Penguin
Enjoy an ad-free experience on nixCraft? This site is self-funded. Help us keep
it that way by supporting us on Patreon, PayPal, or through our merchandise
store.

Patreon ➔    PayPal ➔   

About the author: Vivek Gite is the founder of nixCraft, the oldest running
blog about Linux and open source. He wrote more than 7k+ posts and helped
numerous readers to master IT topics. Join the nixCraft community via RSS Feed
or Email Newsletter.

🥺 Was this helpful? Please add a comment to show your appreciation or feedback.

                            [                    ]

Related Tutorials

  • OpenBSD: Configure Network Interface As A Bridge /…OpenBSD: Configure
    Network Interface As A Bridge /…OpenBSD: Configure Network Interface As A
    Bridge /…
  • How To PFSense Configure Network Interface As A…How To PFSense Configure
    Network Interface As A…How To PFSense Configure Network Interface As A…
  • CentOS 7 Run Script When Network Interface is Up…CentOS 7 Run Script When
    Network Interface is Up…CentOS 7 Run Script When Network Interface is Up…
  • Red Hat Linux (RHEL) network interface configuration commandRed Hat Linux
    (RHEL) network interface configuration commandRed Hat Linux (RHEL) network
    interface configuration command
  • Debian Linux Configure Network Interface Cards - IP…Debian Linux Configure
    Network Interface Cards - IP…Debian Linux Configure Network Interface Cards
    - IP…
  • Red Hat / CentOS Linux: Explain Use of Network…Red Hat / CentOS Linux:
    Explain Use of Network…Red Hat / CentOS Linux: Explain Use of Network…
  • Redhat Linux Network Interface Configuration (NIC)…Redhat Linux Network
    Interface Configuration (NIC)…Redhat Linux Network Interface Configuration
    (NIC)…

9 comments… add one

  • m Apr 17, 2021 @ 23:28
   
    The part of the article on debian / ubuntu:

    # How to see status of network/networking service
    $ sudo systemctl status network #Debian/Ubuntu

    Didn’t work out for me . i’m currently using elementary os hera , and the
    ‘network’ service isn’t defined . instead i have it as ‘networking’
    $ sudo systemctl status networking

    ↩ ∞
      □ Anonymous Feb 18, 2022 @ 13:59
       
        আমার নেট অনেক স্লো কাজ করে

        ↩ ∞
  • Anonymous Mar 31, 2022 @ 14:14
   
    Small mistake on the Arch one, it says the command is “status” to restart
    but it’s supposed to be “restart”

    ↩ ∞
      □ 🛡️ Vivek Gite (Author and Admin)Vivek Gite (Author and Admin) Vivek
        Gite Mar 31, 2022 @ 14:47
       
        Thanks for the heads up!

        ↩ ∞
  • Michael Jun 25, 2023 @ 19:28
   
    There seems to be some cases where network interfaces displayed with `ip
    link show` or `ifconfig` cannot be interacted with using `ifup` or `ifdown
    `, which claims the interface is “unknown”.

    It’s happening with me on OVH instances, for interfaces that appear in the
    list, but that I haven’t manually registered in `/etc/network/interfaces`
    myself. It’s puzzling.

    ↩ ∞
  • tallship Jan 29, 2024 @ 2:14
   
    It really bothers me to no end when people look at something as low level
    as networking and conclude that `/sbin/shutdown -r now` is a solution to
    just about everything that the user is either unaware of the fact that they
    can do something without a reboot, or just can’t be bothered with looking
    it up.

    In your “Tutorial details” table, under “OS Compatibility” record, I didn’t
    see an entry for Slackware. I was going to suggest `/etc/rc.d/rc.inet1
    restart` which, if you’re not sure whether picking just one particular
    interface will suffice, works like a champ and rarely, if ever, interferes
    with any running daemons w3m: Can't load dump.
(except for a couple of seconds while the
    interface is brought down and back up).

    But I decided to read through, and sure enough, you did include Slackware
    Linux – yay!

    So having noticed that, can you update the table for the distro’s which
    this article covers? That way, Slacker n00bs can merely scan the beginning
    of the article and just click on their distro of choice to get to the
    Slackware section.

    I also just noticed that the next FAQ link at the bottom of the page
    directly addresses Slackware Linux in particular!

    Thanks again, for one of the most comprehensive sysadmin info sites on the
    Internet. You NEVER disappoint :)

    Kindest regards,

    ↩ ∞
      □ 🛡️ Vivek Gite (Author and Admin)Vivek Gite (Author and Admin) Vivek
        Gite Jan 29, 2024 @ 10:25
       
        Thanks for the feedback and kind words. I added the Slackware to “OS
        Compatibility”.

        ↩ ∞
  • sk75 Apr 9, 2024 @ 8:56
   
    cant find “/etc/init.d/networking”

    ↩ ∞
      □ 🛡️ Vivek Gite (Author and Admin)Vivek Gite (Author and Admin) Vivek
        Gite Apr 9, 2024 @ 9:56
       
        Check for actual service name (one of theme should be active)

        systemctl status systemd-networkd
        systemctl status network-manager
        systemctl status networking
        systemctl status NetworkManager

        OR look for all network services and look for enabled one:

        systemctl list-unit-files --type=service --state=enabled

        The /etc/init.d/networking is only needed for really older version of
        Debian such as 7/8 etc.

        ↩ ∞

Leave a ReplyCancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

          [                                             ]
          [                                             ]
          [                                             ]
          [                                             ]
          [                                             ]
          [                                             ]
          [                                             ]
Comment * [                                             ]

Name [                              ]

[Post Comment] 

Use HTML <pre>...</pre> for code samples. Your comment will appear only after
approval by the site admin.

Next FAQ: Slackware Linux Restart / Start / Stop Networking Service Command

Previous FAQ: FreeBSD Prevent Users From Seeing Information About Processes
Owned by Other Users

       

🤓 nixCraft SHOP 👇

nixCraft Freak in Shell TshirtnixCraft Freak in Shell Tshirt
                                   🔎 SEARCH

                            [                    ]
🔥 FEATURED ARTICLES

  • 1
    30 Cool Open Source Software I Discovered in 2013
  • 2
    30 Handy Bash Shell Aliases For Linux / Unix / Mac OS X
  • 3
    Top 32 Nmap Command Examples For Linux Sys/Network Admins
  • 4
    25 PHP Security Best Practices For Linux Sys Admins
  • 5
    30 Linux System Monitoring Tools Every SysAdmin Should Know
  • 6
    40 Linux Server Hardening Security Tips
  • 7
    Linux: 25 Iptables Netfilter Firewall Examples For New SysAdmins
  • 8
    Top 20 OpenSSH Server Best Security Practices
  • 9
    Top 25 Nginx Web Server Best Security Practices
  • 10
    My 10 UNIX Command Line Mistakes

📧 SIGN UP FOR MY NEWSLETTER

              Sign up for my newsletterSign up for my newsletter

👀 /etc

  • ➔
    Linux shell scripting tutorial
  • ➔
    RSS/Feed
  • ➔
    About nixCraft
  • ➔
    nixCraft Shop
  • ➔
    Mastodon

       
                                  Cloudflare
                                                                               
