Certainly! **Ranger**, the terminal-based file manager, allows you to define custom commands and enhance its functionality. Here's how you can add your own commands:

1. **Edit the `commands.py` file**:
   - Open your `commands.py` file, which is usually located in `~/.config/ranger/commands.py`. If it doesn't exist, create it.
   - You can use any text editor to modify this file.

2. **Define a new command**:
   - Inside `commands.py`, create a new class that inherits from `Command`. For example:
     ```python
     from ranger.api.commands import Command

     class MyCustomCommand(Command):
         def execute(self):
             if not self.arg(1):
                 self.fm.notify('Wrong number of arguments', bad=True)
                 return
             # Your custom logic here
             self.fm.notify(f'You provided argument: {self.arg(1)}')
     ```
   - Customize the `execute` method to perform the desired action. You can access the program's state, including the current directory and selected files.

3. **Save and reload Ranger**:
   - Save your changes to `commands.py`.
   - If Ranger is already running, you can reload the configuration by typing:
     ```
     :source ~/.config/ranger/rc.conf
     ```

4. **Create a keybinding (optional)**:
   - To make your custom command more accessible, you can create a keybinding.
   - Edit your `rc.conf` file (usually located in `~/.config/ranger/rc.conf`).
   - Add a mapping that associates a key combination with your custom command. For example:
     ```
     map ,n console MyCustomCommand
     ```
     This maps `,n` to execute your `MyCustomCommand`.

5. **Test your custom command**:
   - Restart Ranger or reload the configuration.
   - Now you can type `:MyCustomCommand myarg` to run your defined command.
   - If you created a keybinding, use it to trigger your custom command.

Remember to replace `MyCustomCommand` with your actual command name and adjust the logic inside the `execute` method according to your requirements. Enjoy your customized Ranger experience! 🚀🌟

For more options and inspiration, you can explore the [official Ranger documentation](https://github.com/hut/ranger/blob/9c585e48e14525f11d2405ea0bb9b5eba92e63e9/ranger/config/commands.py).¹³

Source: Conversation with Bing, 3/21/2024
(1) How to define new commands in the ranger file manager?. https://superuser.com/questions/1048647/how-to-define-new-commands-in-the-ranger-file-manager.
(2) Ranger on Linux – A Complete Terminal File Manager For Linux. https://www.linuxfordevices.com/tutorials/linux/ranger-file-manager.
(3) terminal - Ranger cd into a folder (and invoke shell)? - Unix & Linux .... https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/342064/ranger-cd-into-a-folder-and-invoke-shell.
(4) Ranger Terminal file manager - Is it possible to run custom commands .... https://stackoverflow.com/questions/70121092/ranger-terminal-file-manager-is-it-possible-to-run-custom-commands-from-file.
(5) undefined. https://github.com/hut/ranger/blob/9c585e48e14525f11d2405ea0bb9b5eba92e63e9/ranger/config/commands.py.
(6) Ranger Cheatsheet · GitHub. https://gist.github.com/heroheman/aba73e47443340c35526755ef79647eb.
(7) Ranger Custom Settings - Resek's Kingdom. https://resek4.github.io/2022/10/03/Ranger/.
(8) ranger | ranger Commands | Man Pages | ManKier. https://www.mankier.com/1/ranger.
(9) ranger - ArchWiki. https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Ranger.




######################################################################################

from ranger.api.commands import Command

class MegaputCommand(Command):
    def execute(self):
        # Get the path of the currently marked file
        marked_files = self.fm.thistab.get_selection()
        if marked_files:
            file_path = marked_files[0].path
            # Execute the 'megaput' command with the file path
            self.fm.execute_command(f"megaput {file_path}")
        else:
            self.fm.notify("No file is currently marked.", bad=True)
######################################################################################


